# Quodlibet 1, Article 1

**QUOLDLIBET I: The question that has been asked is about God, both with regard to divine nature and the human nature assumed.**

**Question 1: The divine nature**

**Article: Whether the blessed Benedict saw the divine essence in the vision in which he saw the whole world?**

And it was shown that he did.

1. For Gregory says in *Dialogorum* 2 where he speaks of this vision, that "All creation becomes insignificant for a soul that sees the Creator."But to see God is to see the divine essence. Therefore, the I blessed Benedict saw the divine essence.

2. Further. Gregory adds in the same place that "He saw the whole world in the divine light." But there is no other light or radiance of God than God himself, as Gregory says and as the Glossa on Exodus 33:20, "No man will see me and live," says. Therefore, the blessed Benedict saw God through the divine essence.

But to the contrary: John 1:18 says, "No man has seen God at any time." The Glossa says on this that "No one living in mortal flesh can see God's essence.

I answer: it must be said that, according to Wisdom 9:15, “A perishable body weighs the soul down.” However, the highest elevation of the human mind is the attainment of a vision of the divine essence. So it is impossible for a human mind united to a body to see God’s essence unless, *Super Genesim ad literam*, a man is entirely dead to this mortal life or is so separated from his senses that he does not know whether he is in or outside his body, as we read concerning Paul in 2 Cor 12:3. However, when he had that vision the blessed Benedict was neither entirely dead to this life nor separated from his bodily senses, which is clear from the fact that while remaining in the same vision he summoned another person to see the same thing, as Gregory relates. So it is clear that he did not see God’s essence.

Therefore, to the first it must be said that Gregory means in those words to argue from a kind of proportion. For if the ones who see God’s essence reckon all creation insignificant in comparison, it is not astonishing if the blessed Benedict could see something more through the divine light than men commonly see.

To the second it must be said that sometimes God himself is called the light of God, sometimes another light derived from God is called this, according to Psalm 36 (35):9: “In your light we shall see the light.” Here, however, it means the light derived from God.

**Question 2: There were two points of inquiry concerning the human nature in Christ:**
