# Quodlibet 3, Article 1

*Question 3: Two questions were asked concerning angels.*

1. First: Whether an angel depends on a corporeal place according to its essence or is it in a corporeal place according to its action only?

2. Secondly: Concerning an angel’s motion, whether it can move from one place to another without going through an intermediate place.

**Article 1

Whether an angel depends on a corporeal place according to its essence or is it in a corporeal place according to its action only?**

On the first we proceed as follows: It seems that an angel is not in a place according to its action only.

1. For since existence is prior to action, existence in a place is prior to action in a place. But something later is not the cause of something prior. Therefore acting in a place is not the cause of an angel’s existing in a place.

2. Moreover, two angels can act in one place. Therefore, if an angel were in a place only through action, it would follow that many angels would exist simultaneously in one place, which is reputed to be impossible.

[On the contrary, the more noble does not depend on the less noble. But the essence of an angel is more noble than bodily place. Therefore it does not depend on a bodily place.

I answer: The manner in which an angel is in a bodily place can be considered from the manner in which a body is in a place. A body is in place by contact with the place. Bodily contact is through dimensive qantity, which an angel does not have, since it is incorporeal. But in place of that there is virtual quanity. So just as a body is in a place by contact of its dimensive quantity, so an angel is in a place by the contact of its power (virtus). But is anyone wishes to call virtual contact "operation", because to operate is the proper effect of power, an angel could be said to be in place by way of operation Yet operation should not be taken to mean only motion, but any form of union by which its power unites with a body: by presiding, containing, or any other way.

To the first objection, we say that nothing prevents somethng to be prior simply, which is not prior in a particular respect. Thus a body as a subject is simply prior to a surface, but not in so far as it is colored. Similarly, a body is simply prior to touch, yet it is in place by the contact of its dimensive quantity. Likewise, an angel is in place by the contact of its power.

To the second objection, we say that if something is moved perfectly by one mover, it is not appropriate for it to be moved immediately and at the same time by another. So the objection favors the opposite conclusion to the one proposed.

**Article 2

Whether an angel can move from one place to another without passing through an intermediate place?**
