# Quodlibet 4, Article 2

*Article 2*

On the second we proceed as follows: it seems that a man without grace can prepare himself for grace through the natural liberty of choice.

1. Because as Proverbs 16:1 says, “To prepare the mind pertains to man.” However, that is said to pertain to someone which is assigned to his power. Therefore, to be able to prepare himself for grace was assigned to the power of man. He does not then need the aid of grace.

2. Moreover, Anselm says in *De casu diaboli* that someone does not lack grace because God does not want to give it but because he does not want to receive it. Therefore, if he wanted to receive it he could, so he can if he wants to prepare himself for grace without external aid.

3. But the objector said that a man needs the aid of grace in this matter as an external mover. On the contrary: we can say that a man can be moved to conversion not only from good things but even from sins, for example if someone should see someone sinning heinously and from the horror of the sin be turned to God. But the sin is not from God. Therefore, without God’s action a man can prepare himself for grace.

But to the contrary: we are prepared for grace through being turned to God. But for this we need the aid of divine grace, for Lamentations 5:21 says, “Convert us, Lord to you, and we shall be converted.” Therefore, to prepare himself for grace a man needs the aid of divine grace.

Moreover, a man cannot prepare himself for anything except by thinking. But for this itself a man needs the aid of grace, for it is said in 2 Cor 3:5: “We are insufficient of ourselves to think anything as from ourselves.” Therefore, we need the aid of divine grace to prepare ourselves for grace.

I answer: it must be said that in this question we musts guard against the error of Pelagius who maintained that through free choice a man could fulfill the law and merit eternal life nor needed divine aid except in order to know what to do, according to Psalm 143 (143): 10, “Teach me to do your will. But because this seemed much too little─for then we would have knowledge only from God, but the charity by which the precepts of the law are fulfilled we would have from ourselves─the Pelagians afterwards maintained that a man has the beginning of a good work from himself when he consents to faith through free choice, but a man has the consummation of the work from God. But preparation pertains to the beginning of a good work. So saying that a man may be able to prepare himself for grace without the aid of divine grace pertains to the Pelagians’ error and is against the Apostle who says in Phil 1:6: “He who has begun a good work in you will perfect it.”

Therefore, a man needs the aid of grace not only to merit but even to prepare himself for grace, but in different ways. For a man merits through an act of virtue when he not only does good but does well, for which a habit is required as is said in *Ethica* 2. And therefore, grace in the mode of a habit is required for meriting. But for a man to prepare himself to acquire a habit he does not need another habit because then the process would go on to infinity. However, he needs divine aid not only with regard to exterior movers insofar as divine providence procures for a man occasions for salvation, e.g. teaching, examples, and occasionally sicknesses and tribulations, but even with regard to interior motion insofar as God moves the interior heart of a man to the good, according to Proverbs 21:1, “The heart of the king is in the hand of God: he will turn that wherever he wants"That this is necessary the Philosopher proves in a chapter of *De bono fortunae*, for a man does this by his will; however, the principle of the will is choice and of choice, counsel. But if it were asked what kind of counsel he should begin o take, it cannot be said that he should begin to take counsel from a counsel because thus the process would be infinite. So it is necessary for there to be some exterior principle which moves the human mind to taking counsel concerning things to be done, and this must be something better than the human mind. Hence it is not a celestial body which is lower than an intellectual power, but God, as the Philosopher concludes in the same place. Therefore, just as the principle of every motion of lower bodies which are not always moved is the motion of the heavens, so the principle of all interior motions of minds is God as mover. No one then can prepare himself for grace nor do anything good except trough divine aid.

Therefore to the first it must be stated that the necessity of divine aid is not excluded because it pertains to a man to prepare himself for grace through free choice, just as neither is the necessity of heavenly motion excluded because it pertains to fire to heat.

To the second it must be stated that God moves everything according to its manner. So divine motion is imparted to some things with necessity; however, it is imparted to the rational nature with liberty because the rational power is related to opposites. God so moves the human mind to the good, however, that a man can resist this motion. And so, that a man should prepare himself for grace is from God, but that he should lack grace does not have its cause from God but from the man, according to Hosea 13:9, “Your ruin is from yourself, Israel; your help is only from me.”

To the third it must be stated that although sin is not from God, God sometimes arranges sin to be the occasion of someone’s salvation.

**Article 3

Whether man in the state of innocence loved God above all things?**
