# Quodlibet 5, Article 1

*Question 5: [Then the question arises about things that pertain to the goodness of grace:*

First about what pertains to the very goodness of grace

Secondly about what pertains to the evil of guilt, which is opposed to it.

Concerning what pertains to both, a question arises about the two parts of penance.]

[First on Contrition, whether the contrite person must prefer to be in hell rather than sin.]

[Secondly, on confession]

**Article

Whether a contrite person ought to prefer being in hell to sinning?**

On the first we proceed as follows: it seems that a contrite person ought not to prefer being in hell to sinning.

1. For the punishment of hell is eternal and irremediable. But he can be freed from sin through repentance. Therefore, he ought to prefer sinning to being in hell.

2. Further, the punishment of hell includes guilt, for one of the punishments of hell is the worm, i.e. remorse of conscience concerning a sin, but guilt does not include the punishment or hell. Therefore, sin is to be preferred to the punishment of hell.

But to the contrary: Anselm says in *De similitudinibus* that someone ought to prefer being in hell without sin to being in paradise with sin, because an innocent person in hell would not feel the punishment and a sinner in paradise would not enjoy the glory.

I answer: it must be said that in general, a contrite person is bound to prefer suffering any punishment to sinning because there can be no contrition without the charity through which all sins are renounced. From charity a man loves God more than himself, but sinning is acting against God. Now to be punished is to suffer something against oneself. So charity requires that a contrite person prefer any punishment to guilt.

But in a particular case he is not bound to descend to a consideration of this or that punishment. Rather someone would act foolishly if he were to worry himself or another over such particular punishments. For it is clear that just as desirable things move one more when considered in particular than when considered in general, so do terrible things frighten more if considered in particular. And there are some people who do not fall to a lesser temptation who would perhaps fall to a greater one, e.g. someone who just hears of adultery is not incited to lust, but if in thought he descended to considering particular allurements e would be moved more. Likewise someone might not run away from undergoing death for Christ, but if he were to descend to considering individual punishments he would be more restrained from doing it. And therefore, to descend to a consideration of such particulars is to lead a man to temptation and to supply an occasion for sinning.

Therefore, it must be said to the first that deadly guilt is also of itself perpetual, but it can be cured by God’s mercy alone. Moreover, the divine good against which guilt acts more outweighs the good of a created nature to which the punishment is opposed than the perpetuity of the punishment outweighs the temporality of guilt.

To the second, it must be said that remorse of conscience is not guilt, but the consequence of guilt could arise without guilt, as in the case of one who has an erring conscience from a past act of commission, e.g. if someone believes some act he committed before was unlawful when, however, it was permissible, and he himself reckoned it permissible while he committed it.

**Question 6: Then three questions were asked about confession:**
