# Quodlibet 7, Article 2

*Article 2*

On the second we proceed as follows: It seems that someone who can devote attention to the salvation of souls sins if he occupies his time in study.

1. For it is said in Galatians 6:10: “Let us do good while we have time.” Also, no loss is more serious than that of time. Therefore, no one ought to spend his whole time in study, delaying to devote attention to the salvation of souls.

2. Moreover, the perfect are bound to do that which is better. But the religious are perfect, so they ought especially to give up study to devote themselves to the salvation of souls.

3. Further, it is worse to wander off the moral path than a footpath. But a prelate is bound to call his subject back if he sees him wander off the footpath. Therefore all the more is he bound to call him back from wandering off the moral path. But it is an error for a man to neglect what is better. Therefore a prelate ought to force a subject to apply his mind to the salvation of souls and neglect study.

On the contrary side, custom was brought in instead of reasoning.

I answer: It must be said that any two things can be compared with each other both absolutely and according to some particular case. For nothing prohibits that which is absolutely better from being the less preferred in some case, e.g. philosophizing is absolutely better than increasing your wealth, but in time of necessity the latter is to be preferred. And any precious pearl is dearer than one piece of bread, but in a case of hunger the bread is to be preferred to the pearl, according to Lamentations 1:11: “They gave all valuable things for food in order to revive their souls.”

However, we must consider that in any art the one who arranges the art and is called the architect is absolutely better than any manual laborer who carries out what is arranged for him by another. So also in constructing buildings the one who arranges the building, although he does no work with his hands, is contracted for greater pay than the manual workers who hew the wood and cut the stones. But in a spiritual building there are the manual workers, as it were, who particularly pursue the direction of souls, e.g. by administering the sacraments or by doing some such thing in particular. But the bishops are like the principal artificers who command and arrange in what way the aforesaid workers ought to follow their office, because of which they are called “ *episcopi*,” i.e. superintendents. And likewise teachers of theology are like principal artificers who inquire and teach how others ought to procure the salvation of souls.

Therefore it is absolutely better to teach theology and more meritorious if it is done with good intention, than to devote particular care to the salvation of this one and that. Whence the Apostle says concerning himself in 1 Cor 1:17:”For Christ did not send me to baptize but to teach the Gospel,” although baptizing is especially a work bearing on the salvation of souls. And in 2 Timothy 2:2, the same Apostle says, “Commit to faithful men who shall be qualified also to teach others.” Reason itself also demonstrates that it is better to teach those matters pertaining to salvation to them who can be of profit both to themselves and to others than the simple people who can be of use to themselves only.

However, in a particular case where necessity requires, both bishops and teachers, having interrupted their own duties, ought to devote themselves particularly to the salvation of souls.

Therefore, to the first it must be said that someone who does what is better suffers no loss of time by teaching theology, nor does someone who disposes himself to this through study.

To the second it must be said that a person is called perfect because he has perfection or because he has a state of perfection. Now human perfection consists in the charity which joins a man to God. Hence Genesis 17:1 says concerning love of God: “Walk before me and be perfect.” Indeed the Lord says after wards concerning love of neighbor, “Love your enemies,” and in Matthew 5:48 he concludes, “Be therefore perfect.” They are said to have a state of perfection, however, who are solemnly obligated to something connected with perfection.

Now something is connected with the perfection of charity in two ways. Something is connected in one way as a preamble and something preparatory to perfection, like poverty, chastity and such by which a man is drawn back from the care of worldly things so that he has more free time for those things which are God’s, whence such men are more completely instruments of perfection. Because of his Jerome, expounding the words of Peter who said in Matthew:27, “Behold we gave up all and followed you,” says that it is not sufficient for Peter to day “Behold we gave up all,” but he added what was perfect, “and followed you.” Therefore, those who preserve either voluntary poverty or chastity have indeed something preparatory to perfection but they are not said to have a state of perfection unless they obligate themselves to such a position by a solemn profession. Something solemn and perpetual is said to have a state, as is clear in the states of liberty, matrimony and the like.

Something is connected to the perfection of charity in the other way as an effect, as when someone undertakes the direction of souls, for it pertains to perfect charity that someone out of love of God neglect the delight of the contemplative life which he loves more than the active and accept the occupations of the active life to procure the salvation of his neighbors. Therefore, he who applies himself in this way for the salvation of his neighbors has indeed an effect of perfection but not the state of perfection, except a bishop who, with a kind of solemn consecration, undertakes the direction of souls. Archdeacons and parish priests rather have certain duties committed to them than that they have been place through them in a state of perfection. Therefore, only religious and bishops are said to be perfect as having the state of perfection. Hence religious are made bishops, but they are not made archdeacons or parish priests.

So when it is said that perfect persons are obliged to do what is better, it is true if it be understood of those who are called perfect because of the perfection of charity, for such are obligated from an inner law which binds by inclining so that they are obligated to fulfilling it according to the measure of their perfection. However, if it be understood of those who are called perfect because of a state, such as bishops and religious, it is not true, for bishops are only bound to those things to which the charge of the governance undertaken extends, and religious are only bound to that to which they are obligated from the vow of their profession. Otherwise obligation would go on to infinity, but nature, art, and every law must have certain boundaries. Even given that the perfect are always bound to do that which is better, it would not be to the purpose as appears from what was said above.

To the third it must be said tat although a prelate may be bound to call his subject back from all evil, he is not bound to lead him to everything better. This reasoning too has no place in the argument, as neither do he others, etc.

**Question 8

Then two questions were asked concerning those matters which pertain to religious:**
