# Quodlibet 7, Article 1

*Question 7*

1. concerning the office of the Church, whether one who has prebends in two churches ought to recite both offices on the day on which diverse offices are performed in each church?

2. concerning the study of theology, whether someone is bound to give up the study of theology, even if he is suited to teaching others, in order to devote himself to the salvation of souls?

**Article 1: Whether one who has prebends in two churches ought to recite both offices on the day on which diverse offices are performed in each church?**

On the first we proceed as follows: It seems that someone in such a case ought to recite both offices.

1. For a burden ought to correspond to an emolument. Therefore one who has the emolument of a prebend in two churches ought to bear the burden of each by reciting the office of each church.

2. Further, it seems just that if he has a greater emolument from one church in which perhaps a more extensive office is chanted, that he also take on a greater burden by reciting the more extensive office. Therefore, the choice is not his but either he ought to recite both or he ought o recite the office of the church in which he has the more lucrative benefice.

Custom was adduced to the contrary.

I answer: It must be said that, on the supposition that someone is lawfully prebended in two churches, namely because of a dispensation, we must consider that someone who received a prebend in any church is obligated to two things, namely to God to pay the praises due for his benefices, and to the church from which he receives an income. Those things which pertain to a church are subject to the dispensation of the church prelates. And therefore, the debt which he owes the church he ought to pay according to what was stipulated either through himself if it is a prebend which requires residence, or trough a vicar if this suffices according to the statute and custom of the church. The debt which he owes God he ought to pay through himself, but it does not matter to God by which psalms and hymns he praises him, for example, whether he says in Vespers “ *Dixit* *Dominus* ” or “ *Laudate* *, pueri, Dominum*,” except that a person ought to follow the traditions of his forebears. And because the praises he owes God he owes as one man, it suffices that he recite the office once according to the custom of one of the churches of which he is a cleric. Concerning the choice of office it seems reasonable that he should recite the office of that church in which he has the higher rank, e.g. if he is a dean in one and a simple canon in the other he ought to recite the office of the church in which he is a dean. If he is a simple canon in each church, he ought to recite the office of the church of higher dignity, although perhaps he has the more opulent prebend in the lesser church, because temporal matters are of no moment compared to spiritual matters. If indeed both churches are of equal dignity, he can choose whichever office he prefers if he is absent from both churches. However if he is present in one of them, he ought to conform himself to those with whom he is living.

And so the answer to the objections is clear.

**Article 2

Whether someone is bound to give up the study of theology, even if he is suited to teaching others, in order to devote himself to the salvation of souls?**
