# Quodlibet 8, Article 2

*Article 2: Whether a religious is bound to obey his prelate so as to reveal a fault of a brother which he knows?*

Concerning the second, we proceed as follows: It seems that a subject ought to reveal the hidden fault of another brother to the prelate commanding it.

Because, as Jerome says, the fault of one ought not to be hidden to the damage of the many. But it must be presumed that the prelate wants to know the fault of one for the sake of the good of the many. Therefore the fault of another should be revealed o a prelate commanding it.

But to the contrary: Gregory says that even if we ought sometimes to abandon some good for the sake of obedience, we ought in no way to perpetrate something bad for the sake of obedience. But dishonoring another by revealing a hidden sin seems to be bad. Therefore this should not be done for the sake of obedience.

I answer: It must be said that a religious prelate presides over a chapter as an ecclesiastical judge over a judicial tribunal. Whence he can obligate his subjects to make disclosure to him on command with regard to matters on which an ecclesiastical judge in a judicial tribunal can require an oath. Therefore, we must know that the way of proceeding in criminal cases is triple: one through denunciation, another through inquisition, another through accusation.

In the method of denunciation, the correction of a delinquent is intended and therefore brotherly correction ought to precede this, according to the Lord in Matthew 18, so that you accuse him between yourself and him alone. But if he does not listen you should accuse him in the presence of two or three others, and lastly the matter may be related to the Church. For it pertains to charity that someone spare a brother as much as he can. Hence he ought first to strive to correct the brother’s conscience, preserving his reputation by admonishing him in solitary fashion and afterwards in the presence of two or three. Finally, public repute must be disregarded in order that conscience be corrected and the affair must be related to the Church, in which process consideration is taken for conscience. For a sinner, if from the beginning he saw his sin made public, would lose shame and be made to sin more obstinately.

Indeed ill report ought to come first in inquisition, and in accusation a written statement through which the accuser obligates himself to recompense ought to come first. However, in inquisition an accusation the punishment of the sinner is intended for the good of the many. Therefore, if the accuser who obligates himself to recompense should appear in the chapter, the prelate can by a command demand a confession of truth as also an ecclesiastical judge can demand an oath. And likewise, if ill report comes first, the prelate can by a command ascertain the truth and the subjects are bound to obey. If, however, the process is one of simple denunciation, the religious is not bound by the prelate giving the command to reveal a brother’s fault unless he sees him uncorrected by a preceding warning. Rather he would sin more if he revealed it on the prelate’s command because he is bound more strongly to obey the Gospel than the prelate. And the prelate would sin much more if he were to lead his subject to pervert the order of the Gospel.

To the first it must be stated that with respect to a past sin on which one has been corrected already by a secret admonition or on which it can be hoped that one will be corrected, unless the contrary is found to be the case, thee can be no threat of danger to the multitude. Still, the objection goes forward concerning a future sin which is dangerous to the multitude, either spiritually or corporeally, for then it is not necessary to wait for a secret admonition, but rather it is necessary to oppose the danger immediately. Whence also the Lord does not say, “if he intends to sin in the future,” but “if he has sinned in the past” (Matthew 18:15).

Question 9: Then four questions pertaining to sin were asked:
