# Quodlibet 8, Article 1

*Question 8*

1. whether a religious is bound to obey his prelate so as to reveal to him a secret which was committed to his trust?

2. whether he is bound to obey him so as to reveal a hidden fault of a brother which he knows?

**Article 1: Whether a religious is bound to obey his prelate so as to reveal to him a secret which was committed to his trust?**

Concerning the first, we proceed as follows: It seems that a religious is bound to reveal to a prelate commanding it any secret committed to his trust.

For by a solemn profession a religious bound himself to obey the prelate but he bound himself by a simple promise to keep the secret. Therefore, he ought to obey the prelate rather than keep the secret.

But to the contrary: Bernard says that what was instituted for the sake of charity does not militate against charity. But the profession of obedience which a religious makes to a prelate was instituted for the sake of charity. Therefore it does not militate against the charity by which anyone is bound to keep a neighbor’s trust.

I answer: It must be said that, as Bernard says in *De dispensatione et praecepto*, it is sufficient obedience for a religious to obey his prelate concerning those matters which pertain to the rule either directly, such as those that are written in the rule, or indirectly, such as those which can be reduced to the former as are services produced for brothers and punishments inflicted for faults and the like. Now it is perfect obedience for him to obey simply in all matters which are not against the rule or against God, but it is a rash and impermissible obedience for someone to obey the prelate in these matters which are against God or against the rule.

We must therefore consider in the case under question whether it is permissible for a religious to reveal a secret committed to his trust. A distinction must be made with regard to secrets. There is a kind of secret which it is not permissible to conceal, e.g. one that tends to the danger of others from whom one is bound to avert the danger. Whence it is even contained in the oath of fidelity that servants should reveal such secrets to their masters. Therefore, a religious is bound to make such a secret known on the prelate’s command, even if he promised not to reveal it─unless perhaps he heard it in confession, because then it must in no way be revealed. As Isidore says, “In cases of bad promises, break the faith. There is, however, another kind of secret which of itself can be concealed without sin, and such a secret a religious ought in no way to announce to the prelate commanding it if it is committed his trust, for he would sin in breaking the trust committed to him.

To the first, it must therefore be said that the obligation which comes from natural law and the promise made in baptism to keep those matters which pertain to faith and charity, is a more solemn obligation than those which come from taking religious vows.

**Article 2: Whether a religious is bound to obey his prelate so as to reveal a fault of a brother which he knows?**
