# Quodlibet 26, Article 2

*Article 2*

On the second we proceeded as follows: it seems that it is a sin for a preacher to have his eye on temporal matters.

For it is said in Luke 12:31, "Seek first the kingdom of God," on which the Glossa says, "i.e., eternal goods," "and all these will be added to you," to which the Glossa adds, "even to those not seeking them." 52 Therefore, it is not permissible for a preacher to have his eye on temporal matters.

But to the contrary: 1 Cor. 9:10 says, "He who plows ought to plow in hope," to which the Glossa adds, "of temporal stipends." So it is permissible for a preacher, concerning whom it speaks there, to have his eye on temporal matters.

I answer: it must be said that having an eye on earthly things happens in two ways. In one way it happens with regard to payment or reward, and in this way it is not permissible for a preacher to have his eye on earthly things because he would then make the Gospel venal. In the other way it happens with regard to the stipends necessary to support life, and in this way it is permissible for a preacher to have his eye on earthly things. Hence on 1 Timothy 5:17, "Let the elders that rule, etc.," Augustine's gloss says, "It is a matter of necessity to take the means of living, it is a matter of charity to supply them. However, the Gospel is not venal because of those who do, for if they so sell, they sell a great thing cheaply. Therefore, let them take the necessities of life from the people, and the reward of dispensation from the Lord."

And through this the response to the objections is clear.

**Question 7

Two questions were asked concerning punishments themselves:**
