# Lecture 7 — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote6" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote6); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote6\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — Therefore be not drunk with wine, wherein is luxury. — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote7" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote7); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote7\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

18 And be not drunk with wine, wherein is luxury; but be ye fined with the Holy Spirit, 19 Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual canticles, singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord; 20 Giving thanks always for all things, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God and the Father; 21 Being subject one to another, in the fear of Christ.

He urged them before to that newness which is in opposition to the old illusion (5:15), now he does the same in reference to the old ways of carnal sins. Or, we might say that he previously reprimanded carnal sins in regard to voluptuousness, and here does it concerning gluttony. He makes two points:

First, he forbids the old way.

Secondly, he introduces them to the new condition (5: 18b).

Thus he says: I have stated that fornication and all uncleanness should not be even named among you. Yet you ought also be careful to abstain from superfluous wine since excessive food and drink is a cause of sensuality; and especially wine which warms and excites a man. ‘Vine is a luxurious thing, and drunkenness riotous” (Prov. 20:1). “When the king was merry, and after very much drinking was well warmed with wine, he commanded... to, bring in queen Vasthi before the king” (Est. 1:10-11). “Fornication and wine and drunkenness take away the understanding” (0s. 4:11). Whence Jerome remarks: “A man over whom Sodom could not prevail was conquered by wine—Lot.”

**But be ye filled with the Holy Spirit**. Among all those things which breed a variety of moods is wine; thus it begets animosity and makes men “talk in thousands” as 3 Esdras 3 (21) affirms. Appropriately therefore does he teach them the opposite, to be filled with the Holy Spirit who engenders an intensity of devotion: “In spirit fervent” (Rom. 12:11). Who also spreads joy and spiritual happiness: “Justice, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost” (Rom. 14:17). Who, moreover, makes men speak out boldly: “And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost; and they began to speak with diverse tongues, according as the Holy Ghost gave them to speak” (Ac. 2:4), so that those who heard them thought they were drunk (Ac. 2:13).

But do we possess the Holy Spirit by our own power? reply and say that the Holy Spirit is possessed in two ways. Either he is had receptively, and it is not in our power to receive him, rather we accept him as a gift from God: “the charity of God is poured forth in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us” (Rom. 5:5). Or he is possessed dispositively, and even here we are not capable of receiving him since we cannot dispose ourselves without the grace of God: “Not that we are sufficient to think any thing of ourselves, as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God” (2 Cor. 3:5).

Or, someone may be said to receive the Holy Spirit, and nonetheless not be full of the Holy Spirit. He has the grace of the Holy Spirit in reference to certain aspects of his life, but not in reference to every one of his actions. Then is he said to be full of the Holy Spirit when he avails himself of the Spirit in all be does.

The way to be filled is found in the love of God and one’s fellow men. Thus when he says speaking to yourselves in Psalms (v. 19):

First, he touches on the way of being filled in relation to God.

Secondly, in relation to one’s fellow man (5:21).

Concerning the first of these he does three things:

First, he prescribes spiritual meditation.

Secondly, he speaks of spiritual exultation (5:19b).

Thirdly, comes the thanksgiving (5:20).

The first has two parts:

First, he writes of the manner of the meditation.

Secondly, the subject matter of it (5:19a).

There are two ways of speaking to yourselves. One is external, of a man talking to other men; another is interior, of a man speaking to himself. This latter ought to be repentant: I will speak in the bitterness of my soul” (Job 10:1). And it ought to be done in secret: “when you pray, enter your chamber and, having shut the door, pray to your Father in secret” (Mt. 6:6). “When I go into my house, I shall repose myself with her [wisdom]” (Wis. 8:16).

He then touches on the subject-matter of meditative prayer when he says in psalms and hymns and spiritual canticles. To sing is to make use of the psaltery; and thus in psalms, that is, in good works. “Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel: thepleasant psaltery with the harp” (Ps. 80:3). And hymns, that is, by the divine praises: “A hymn to all. his saints” (Ps. 148:14); and spiritual canticles concerning the hope of eternal realities: “Rejoicing in hope” (Rom. 12:12); “Upon the ten stringed psaltery, with a canticle upon the harp” (Ps. 91:4), “sing ye to the Lord a new canticle, because he hath done wonderful things” (Ps. 97:1). Hence we meditate on honest actions and what we should do; on the divine praise and what we should imitate; and on the joy of heaven and what we should render homage to, and how.

The first effect of the Holy Spirit is a holy meditation, and the second is a spiritual exultation; from frequent meditation the fire of charity is enkindled in the heart. “My heart grew hot within me: and in my meditation a fire shall flame out” (Ps. 38:4). And from this a spiritual joy is born within the heart; thus he mentions singing and making melody so that our will would be stirred by spiritual joys to undertake good works. I will sing with the spirit, I will sing also with the understanding” (1 Cor. 14:15). “In all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual canticles, singing in grace in your hearts to God” (Col. 3:16).

This refutes the error of those heretics who claim that it is useless to sing vocal canticles to the Lord; that only spiritual ones matter. In the praises of the Church there is an essential element to consider, what the Apostle refers to as in your hearts. Yet there is another element [the external expression in song] which has a twofold purpose. One is that it is for us, to stimulate our minds to an interior devotion. If someone is rather moved to frivolity or vain glory by it, this is contrary to the Church’s intention. Its second purpose is for others, since by it the illiterate become more devout: “And when the minstrel played, the hand of the Lord came upon him” (2 Kgs. 3:15).”

The third effect is thanksgiving because, when someone is influenced in these ways toward God, he recognizes that everything he has is from God. For the more a person is affected by his relation to God and knows him, the more does he see God as greater while he himself becomes smaller, indeed almost nothing, in comparison with God. “Now my eye seeth you. Therefore do I reprehend myself, and do penance in dust and ashes” (Job 42:5-6). So he declares giving thanks always for all things, for all his gifts, whether of prosperity or adversity. “I will bless the Lord at all times; his praise shall be always in my mouth” (Ps. 33:1). For adversities are also gifts to us on the way: “Count it all joy when you shall fall into divers temptations” (Jas. 1:2). And the Apostles “indeed went from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Jesus” (Ac. 5:41). “In all things give thanks” (1 Thess. 5:18).

This is in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ since all blessings come through him. “Let us have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom also we have access through faith into this grace” (Rom. 5:1-2). Yet he adds to God inasmuch as he is our maker through creation, and the Father since he sent Christ to us through whom he regenerated us. Thus we give thanks to him as God regarding the goods of nature, and to him as Father in reference to the goods of grace.

He sets down the way of being filled [by the Spirit] in relation to one’s fellow men by saying being subject one to another, in the fear of Christ, that is, not out of a human fear but from a reverence for Christ.
