# Lecture 1 — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote1" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote1); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote1\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — Therefore he adds and delivered himself for us. “He has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood” (Apoc. 1:5). I live in the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and delivered himself for me” (Gal. 2:20). “He hath delivered his soul unto death and was reputed with the wicked” (Is. 53:12).

> 1 Be ye therefore followers of God, as most dear children; 2 And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us and hath delivered himself for us, an oblation and a sacrifice to God for an odour of sweetness.

Once be has exhorted them to kindness and mercy, which are the effects of charity (4:32), he gives them a model [to imitate]. In reference to this he does two things:

First, he urges them to imitate the exemplar, namely, God.

Secondly, he lets them know in what they should imitate him (5:2).

I have affirmed, he says, that you ought to forgive one another as God has forgiven you in Christ. Be therefore followers of God because this is indispensable even if it is difficult. “What is man, said I, that he can follow the King his maker?” (Eccl. 2:12). Nonetheless, human nature would never achieve its end except in union with God. “My foot has followed his steps: I have kept his way, and have not declined from it” (Job 23:11). He must be imitated insofar as it is possible for us to do so-a son must imitate his father. Thus he adds as children since he is our father through creation: “Is he not your father, who possessed you, and made you, and created you?” (Deut. 32:6). He puts in most dear because God chose us to share in what is his very own.

And walk in love (v. 2) comes next, here:

First, be maintains that the way to imitate God is in ebarity.

Secondly, he speaks of the tremendous sign of charity (5:2b).

The charity of God has made us his most dear children: “For you have not received the spirit of bondage again in fear; but you have received the spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry: Abba, Father. For the Spirit himself gives testimony to our spirit that we are the sons of God” (Rom. 8:15-16). Certainly we ought to follow him in love. He says walk to signify “you must always advance” as in Genesis 17 (1): ‘Walk before me and be perfect.” This should be in love since love is so good that man ought always to make further progress in it, and is that kind of a debt which man always has to pay. “Owe no man any thing, but to love one another” (Rom. 13:8). Or in love may mean the way in which God is followed more closely: “And I show you yet a more excellent way. If I speak with the tongues of men, and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling symbol” (1 Cor. 12:31-13:1). “Above all these things have charity, which is the bond of perfection” (Col. 3:14). This must be done according to Christ’s example, whence he adds as Christ also has loved us. Jesus “having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them unto the end” (Jn. 13:1).

According to Gregory, “love is verified when it is expressed in action.”

This death was both advantageous and necessary for us, thus he says an oblation and a sacrifice. Here the Apostle is speaking in the way the Old Law does. In it, as Leviticus 4 indicates, when someone sinned he was obliged to offer, because of it, the sacrifice and oblation which was designated for the sin. Then too, when someone gave thanks to God, or wished to obtain some favor, he had to offer a victim of peace, as prescribed in Leviticus 3 (9), which was of a most sweet savour to the Lord (v. 16). These, however, are all accomplished through Christ who, in order that we might be cleansed from sin and attain to glory, delivered himself for us, an oblation through the actions he performed during his life: “He was offered because it was his own will, and he opened not his mouth” (Is. 53:7); and [he died as] a sacrifice to God for sin.

This was for an odour of sweetness, hinting at what is said in Leviticus 3 (5 ff.). But certainly the odour described there was not pleasing to God in itself but according to its signification, inasmuch as it symbolized the sweet-smelling oblation of the body of Christ, the Son of God. “Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a plentiful field” (Gen. 27:27). “Draw me, we will run after you to the odour of thy ointments” (Cant. 1:3). In this way also we ought to offer spiritual sacrifices to God: “A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit” (Ps. 50:19).
