# Lecture 2 — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote3" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote3); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote3\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — For such a servant does not possess simplicity and rectitude of intention. Hence he forbids this saying not serving to the eye, namely, the master, on account of a temporal advantage only, as it were pleasing men. “If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ” (Gal. 1:10). But, as the servants of Christ, “Serve the Lord Christ” (Col. 3:24). And how? Doing the will of God, by carrying his commands into action. “Carry out his word” (Ps. 102:20 *), just as Christ did: “I came down from heaven, not to do my own will but the will of him that sent me. Now this is the will of the Father who sent me” (Jn. 6:38-39), that I obey men for the sake of God. And thus he states as servants of Christ, being of service to the Lord and not to men; that is, not for their own sakes but for that of the Lord. — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote4" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote4); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote4\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — You should act with a good will, that is, with the right intention; “that you may stand perfect and full in all the will of God” (Col. 4:12). — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote5" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote5); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote5\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — “Whatever your hand is able to do, do it earnestly: for neither work, nor reason, nor wisdom, nor knowledge, shall be in hell, whither you are hastening” (Eccl. 9:10). What he does the same shall he receive from the Lord, as a recompence. “Knowing that you shall receive of the Lord the reward of inheritance” (Col. 3:24).

5 Servants, be obedient to them that are your lords according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in the simplicity of your heart, as to Christ; 6 Not serving to the eye, as it were pleasing men, but, as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart; 7 With a good will serving, as to the Lord, and not to men; 8 Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man shall do, the same shall he receive from the Lord, whether he be bond or free. 9 And you, masters, do the same things to them, forbearing threatenings;, knowing that the Lord both of them and you is in heaven. And there is no respect of persons with him.

Once he has given advice concerning the two relationships of husband to wife, and father to children (5:22), he now instructs them regarding the relation of servant to master. In reference to this he does two things:

First, he instructs the servant.

Secondly, the master (6:9).

The first has three parts:

First, he sets down the admonition.

Secondly, he explains it (6:6).

Thirdly, he indicates the reward (6:8).

Again, the first part has three subdivisions; he admonishes them:

First, to obedience.

Secondly, to reverence.

Thirdly, to simplicity of heart.

For he instructs them to obey as by a command of the Lord. Hence be states Servants, be obedient to your lords according to the flesh. He cautions them regarding reverence, saying with interior fear: “if I be a master, where is my fear?” (Mal. 1:6). And exterior trembling: “serve ye the Lord with fear; and rejoice unto him with trembling” (Ps. 2:11). And this must be in the simplicity of your heart: “Seek him in simplicity of heart” (Wis. 1:1); “Have you considered my servant Job... a simple and upright man, and fearing God, and avoiding evil?” (Job 1:8).

In this way is Christ to be served; thus he says as to Christ. “Seek him in simplicity of heart” (Wis. 1:1); “O Lord God, I also in the simplicity of my heart have joyfully offered all these things” (1 Par. 29:17). He also mentions as to Christ since whatever power a master has comes from Christ the Lord. “Therefore, he who resists the power resists the ordinance of God” (Rom. 13:2). They must be served as Christ is in whatever is not contrary to faith nor contrary to Christ himself.

He explains in simplicity of heart:

First, he repudiates what is against simplicity.

Secondly, he teaches the appropriate way of acting (6:6b).

It is against simplicity that a servant be concerned with what the eye sees instead of what pleases the Lord.

How should this be done? From the heart. “Whatsoever you do, do it from the heart, as to the Lord, and not to men” (Col. 3:23).

Next, he mentions the reward, saying knowing —“These things I write to you that you may know” (I Jn. 5:13)— that any man... whether he be bond or free is not favored because of his status. For there is no respect of persons with God. “There is neither Jew nor Greek; there is neither bond nor free; there is neither male or female. For you are all one in Christ Jesus” (Gal. 3:28). “In very deed I perceive that God is not a respecter of persons. But, in every nation, he that feareth him and worketh justice is acceptable to him” (Ac. 10: 34-35).

Whatsoever good thing any man shall do it must be accomplished for the universe:

Then he goes on to give advice to masters, and he makes two points:

First, he sets down a warming.

Secondly, he adds the reason (6:9b).

He states, therefore, And you, masters, do the same, namely, with a proportional identity: as servants act from the heart and with a good will, so also should you act. “If you have a faithful servant, let him he to you as your own soul” (Sirach 33:31)— forbearing threatenings and not only [refraining from] blows and whippings.

Why? He gives the reason when he says knowing that the Lord both of them and you is in heaven. For the same is Lord over all” (Rom. 10:12). it is as though he were, saying: You are fellow servants, and hence you ought to behave well towards them. “Should not you then have had compassion also on your fellow servant? (Mt. 18:33). And there is no respect of persons with him. Romans 2 (11) makes the same statement, as also Acts 10 (34). “you doe not respect any person” (Lk. 20-21).
