# Chapter 1, Lecture 2

8 For God is my witness, how I yearn for you all with the affection of Christ Jesus. 9 And it is my prayer that your love may abound more and more, with knowledge and all discernment, 10 so that you may approve what is excellent, and may be pure and blameless for the day of Christ, 11 filled with the fruits of righteousness which come through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God. 12 I want you to know, brethren, that what has happened to me has really served to advance the gospel, 13 so that it has become known throughout the whole praetorian guard and to all the rest that my imprisonment is for Christ; 14 and most of the brethren have been made confident in the Lord because of my imprisonment, and are much more bold to speak the word of God without fear. 15 Some indeed preach Christ from envy and rivalry, but others from good will. 16 The latter do it out of love, knowing that I am put here for the defense of the gospel; 17 the former proclaim Christ out of partisanship, not sincerely but thinking to afflict me in my imprisonment.

Having stated the reason for hope concerning the future, he now indicates the matters for which he makes supplication for them. First, he mentions his desire, which is shown to be very fervent; secondly, the matter of his prayer (1:9).

Since the heart’s desire is known to God alone, he calls on God to witness that he prays for them with desire: “Behold, my witness,” God, “is in heaven” (Job 16:19). *How I yearn for you all,* i.e., I, living *with the affection of Christ Jesus.* Or, how I long for you to be in it; as if to say: How I long after your,salvation and participation in the merciful heart of Christ. “Through the tender mercy of our God” (Lk. 1:78): As if to say that the power of love reaches to the inmost depths of the heart. Or, I long for you to be in the heart of Jesus Christ, i.e., that you may love Him intimately, and that you may be loved by Him; for man’s life consists in this.

Then when he says, *and it is my prayer,* he mentions his prayer. He asks three things: the first pertains to increasing charity within. For the interior affections are perfected by charity; therefore, if one lacks charity, he should desire to obtain it; if he has it, he should desire that it be made perfect. Hence he says, *that your love may abound more and more.* God is the one from whom an increase of charity should be sought, because God is the only one who works this in us: “God is able to provide you with every blessing in abundance, so that you may always have enough of everything and may provide in abundance for every good work” (2 Cor. 9:8). Hence it is necessary that we pray for it, because “unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven” (Mt. 5:20).

The second request regards understanding; hence he says, *with knowledge.* But does knowledge arise from charity? It seems so, because it is stated in 1 John (2:27): “But the anointing which you received from him abides in you, and you have no need that any one should teach you; as his anointing teaches you about everything, and is true, and is no lie.” Furthermore, charity is the Spirit, of whom it is said in John (16:13): “When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth.” The reason for this is that when a person has a habit, if that habit is right, then right judgment of things pertaining to that habit follows from it; but if it is corrupted, then false judgment follows. Thus, the temperate person has good judgment in regard to sex, but an intemperate person does not, having a false judgment. Now all things that are done by us must be informed with charity. Therefore, a person with charity has a correct judgment both in regard to things knowable; hence be says, *with knowledge,* by which one recognizes the truth and adheres to the truths of faith; and this is the knowledge of holy things mentioned in Wisdom (10:10); and in regard to things to be done; hence he says, *and all discernment* (*sense*), which is the faculty that deals with external objects. Its function is to judge correctly and quickly about the proper object of sense. As a result, this name has been transferred to the internal judgment of reason; hence, those who possess correct judgment in regard to what they should do are called sensible: “Think,” i.e., sense, “of the Lord with uprightness” (Wis. 1: 1): “To fix one’s thought on,” i.e., to sense, “her is perfect understanding” (Wis. 6:15). But this discernment should be able not only to recognize, but also to distinguish between, good and evil, and between good and better; hence he says, so *that you may approve what is excellent:* “Earnestly desire the higher gifts” (1 Cor. 12:31) and in (15:1): “Make love your aim, and earnestly desire the spiritual gifts;” hence he says, *what is excellent.* The third request concerns behavior. First, he mentions immunity from evil, when he says that you may be *pure.* For there are two evils to be avoided: first, internal destruction, by which a man is destroyed in himself; and this is excluded by sincerity: “the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth” (1 Cor. 5:8). The other concerns our neighbor, namely, offenses; hence he says, *and blameless:* “Give no offense to Jews or to Greeks or to the church of God, just as I try to please all men in everything I do” (1 Cor. 10:32); “We put no obstacle in anyone’s way, so that no fault may be found with our ministry” (2 Cor. 6:3). *For the day of Christ,* i.e., to the end of our lives: “He who endures to the end will be saved” (Mt. 24:13). As to the effects of grace he says, *filled with the fruits of righteousness.* Good works are the fruit: “The return (fruit) you get is sanctification and its end, eternal life” (Rom. 6:22). Or, *the fruits of righteousness,* i.e., the reward of justice, namely, the crown: “Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness” (2 Tim. 4:8); “For the fruit of good labors is renowned” (Wis. 3:15). This is obtained *through Jesus Christ,* because all that we do is good through Him. “Apart from me you can do nothing” (Jn. 15:5). Furthermore, these things must be done for this end, *to the glory and praise of God,* because God is glorified by the works of the saints, since they cause other people to break out in praise of God: “Praise God in his sanctuary (saints)” (Ps. 156: 1); “And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and a glory before all the nations of the earth who shall hear of all the good that I do for them” (Jer. 33:9).

Then when he says, I *want you to know, brethren,* he advises them in regard to the future. First, he gives examples to be followed and to be avoided; secondly, he concludes his moral exhortation (ch. 4). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he shows what should be imitated; secondly, what should be avoided (ch. 3). The first is divided into two parts: first, he urges them to imitate him; secondly, to imitate others (ch. 2). The first part is divided into three parts: first, he gives his own progress as an example; secondly, the joy he has in this progress (1:18); thirdly, the fruit of this progress (1:19). The first is again divided into two Parts: first, he mentions his progress; secondly, the manner (1:13).

He says, therefore: I have urged you to make progress; and in order that you might have my progress as a pattern, *I want you to know, brethren, that what has happened to me* outwardly, namely, tribulations, did not change me inwardly, but *has really served to advance the gospel,* because the result was that the faith I preached made greater progress: “If we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation; and if we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which you experience when you patiently endure the same sufferings that we suffer” (2 Cor. 1: 6).

Then he shows his own progress; secondly, that of others (1:14). In regard to himself, of course, it was obvious that he suffered for Christ with constancy, *so that it has become known... that my imprisonment is for Christ.* This redounds to Christ’s glory: “But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or a wrongdoer, or a mischief-maker; yet if one suffers as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but under that name let him glorify God” (1 Pet. 4:15). *Throughout the whole praetorian guard,* and in Caesar’s court. As for the progress of others, their faith has grown apace: *most of the brethren have been made confident in the Lord because of my imprisonment, and are much more bold to speak the word of God without fear.* “Like the magistrate of the people, so are his officials” (Si. 10:2); “The righteous are bold as a lion” (Prov. 28:1). Yet there is some diversity among these, because some spoke properly and some not. Of those who spoke properly, some did so out of general love, and others out of love for the Apostle; of those who spoke improperly, some acted out of general malice, and some out of personal hatred of the Apostle. Yet it seems to me that the Apostle is revealing the two reasons why some preached: first, because of envy; consequently, to show their evil intention the Apostle says, *from envy and rivalry:* “For where jealousy and selfish ambition exists, there will be disorder and every vile practice” (Jas. 3:16); “For while there is jealousy and strife among you, are you not of the flesh?” (1 Cor. 3:5); secondly, out of love for Christ and the gospel; hence he says, *but others from good will:* “Deal favorably, O Lord, in your good will with Sion” (Ps. 50:20). The Apostle continues, *the latter do it out of love,* which causes good will, because they preached to make up for my being prevented from teaching. Then the Apostle explains what he had said, saying that, *the former proclaim Christ out of partisanship* and not according to a right intention. For their depraved intention is clear in two ways: first, by preaching publicly they caused a disturbance among the Gentiles against the Apostle and thus added to the affliction he already had; secondly, because they believed that Paul would be disturbed, when he heard that they were usurping the task committed to him, thereby adding more affliction to one already afflicted.
