# Chapter 2, Lecture 4

14 Do all things without grumbling or questioning, 15 that you may be blameless and innocent, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you shine as lights in the world, 16 holding fast the word of life, so that in the day of Christ I may be proud that I did not run in vain or labor in vain. 17 Even if I am to be poured as a libation upon the sacrificial offering of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with you all. 18 Likewise you also should be glad and rejoice with me. 19 I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, so that I may be cheered by news of you. 20 I have no one like him, who will be genuinely anxious for your welfare. 21 They all look after their own interests, not those of Jesus Christ. 22 But Timothy’s worth you know, how as a son with a father he has served with me in the gospel. 23 I hope therefore to send him just as soon as I see how it will go with me; 24 and I trust in the Lord that shortly I myself shall come also. 25 1 have thought it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus my brother and fellow worker and fellow soldier, and your messenger and minister to my need, 26 for he has been longing for you all, and has been distressed because you heard that he was ill. 27 Indeed he was ill, near to death. But God had mercy on him, and not only on him but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. 28 I am the more eager to send him, therefore, that you may rejoice at seeing him again, and that I may be less anxious. 29 So receive him in the Lord with all joy; and honor such men, 30 for he nearly died for the work of Christ, risking his life to complete your service to me.

Above, the Apostle exhorted them to do works leading to salvation; here he teaches them how. First, he teaches them the way to do these works; secondly, he gives the reason (2:15).

First, he points out two ways to act, namely, *without grumbling or questioning.* For virtuous works are very difficult, and offer a fertile field for grumbling: “We must not grumble, as some of them did and were destroyed by the Destroyer” (1 Cor. 10: 10). Furthermore, they should not hesitate about doing them: “He who doubts is like a wave of the sea that is driven and tossed by the wind” (Jas. 1:6).

He gives reasons for this: first, on their part, and then on the part of the Apostle. On their part he gives three reasons: first, in regard to the faithful when he says, *that you may be blameless:* “Walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless” (Lk. 1:6). For no one can exist without sin, but he can without grumbling; hence he urges them to do this. Secondly, in regard to God, *and innocent children of God.* For a son is like his Father. But God is innocent; hence we are innocent sons of God, when our intention is directed to one object: “A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways” (Jas. 1:8); “Be as wise as serpents and innocent as doves” (Mt. 10:16). Thirdly, in regard to unbelievers, *without blemish,* i.e., behave well toward unbelievers and give no offense *in the midst of a crooked,* as to evil works, *and perverse generation,* as to unbelief. And this is when they cannot be defamed by them: “Give the enemy no occasion to revile us” (1 Tim. 5:14). He gives the reason for this when be says, *among whom you shine as lights in the world,* because no matter how the world changes, the lights of the world remain bright: “You are the light of the world” (Mt. 5:14). They are luminous, not in essence, because God alone is light in this way: “The life was the light of man” (Jn. 1:4). The same is true of the saints: “He was not the light” (Jn. 1:8).

But they are light inasmuch as they have some of that light which was the light of men, i.e., of the Word of God radiating on us. Therefore he says, *holding fast the word of life,* i.e., the word of Christ: “Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life” (Jn. 6:69); “Thy word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path” (Ps. 119:105).

Then he gives a reason on the part of the Apostle: *so that I may be proud;* secondly, he explains the reason, because subjects should act well so as to redound to the glory of their prelates. For it is their glory, when subjects are well behaved: “A wise son makes a glad father” (Prov. 10:1); “You are our glory and joy” (1 Thess. 2:20). And this, *in the day of Christ,* namely, when He will lead His faithful to Himself. This redounds to his glory for two reasons; because of the labor and suffering he endured in preaching. Therefore, he says, *that I did not run in vain or labor in vain.* He calls preaching a running because of his agility in traveling from Jerusalem to Spain. He says *labor,* because of the contradictions and punishments he suffered; and this not in vain, but in much fruit: “His grace toward me was not in vain” (1 Cor. 15: 10).

He refers to his suffering when he says, *even* if *I am to be poured as a libation upon the sacrificial offering of your faith.* For in converting others he offers to God a sacrifice of those he converts. But sometimes tyrants mingle the blood of the offerers with their sacrifices, as in Luke (13:0); hence he says’ I offer God the sacrifice of your faith. And if it turn out that I myself am immolated, i.e., killed, by reason of offering the sacrifice of your conversion, I *am glad* on my part: “Count it all joy, my brethren, when you meet various trials” (Jas. 1:2), *and rejoice with you all,* that you have the faith, even with danger to my person with whom you rejoice in this too; hence he says, *likewise you also should be glad and rejoice with me:* “Rejoice with those who rejoice” (Rom. 12:15).

Then when he says, I *hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon,* he proposes his own disciples as an example: first, Timothy and then, Epaphroditus. In regard to the first he does three things: first, he promises to send Timothy; secondly, he commends him (2:20); thirdly, he hints at the time he will send him (2:23).

He says, therefore, I *hope in the Lord Jews to send Timothy to you soon.* Here it should be noted that the Apostle has such trust in God that he attributes the slightest things to God: “Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to claim anything as coming from us; our sufficiency is from God” (2 Cor. 3:5). The text is clear.

Then he praises him: first, on account of his love for them, and secondly, because of his devotion to the Apostle. Thus he makes a good mediator, because he loves them and he venerates him. He says: I am sending Timothy because I *have no one like him,* i.e., so interested in your progress: [“He makes men of one way to dwell in one house” (Ps. 67:7)] *who will be genuinely anxious for your welfare. Genuinely anxious,* because it is for God alone: “We are as men of sincerity, as commissioned by God, in the sight of God we speak in Christ” (2 Cor. 2:17). The reason why I have no one of the same mind is because *all look after their own interests, not those of Jesus Christ,* i.e., they do not seek things pertaining to the salvation of their neighbor and the glory of God, but pertaining to their profit and glory and themselves.

But did Luke and Epaphroditus and the others, who were with the Apostle seek the things that were their own? I answer that in the company of the Apostle were many who sought this and who deserted him: “For Demas, in love with this present world, has deserted me and gone to Thessalonica; Crescens has gone to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia. Luke alone is with me” (2 Tim. 4:9). But it is a custom that sometimes the Scripture speaks of some as though of all: “From the least to the greatest of them, every one is greedy for unjust gains and from prophet to priest, every one deals falsely” (Jer. 6:13). Therefore it is a narrowed use of the word “all.”

And if you would know how he has behaved in regard to me, I answer that, *Timothy’s worth you know, how as a son with a father he has served with me in the gospel,* i.e., as though he were a special son: I sent to you Timothy, my beloved and faithful child in the Lord” (1 Cor. 4:17). 1 *hope therefore to send him, so* solicitous for you and so dear to me.

But why not at once? Because it is otherwise with Christ and with the other saints. In Christ was fulness of grace; hence He always had knowledge of all things; but not so the other saints. Hence the Apostle foresaw some things about himself and was ignorant of others. Thus, he received no revelation that he would be delivered from his imprisonment; hence he says, *just as soon as I see how it will go with me,* because if I were granted leave, I would come to you in person; consequently, *I trust in the Lord that shortly I myself shall come also.* But he was not freed from his prison: “Yea, thou dost light my lamp: the Lord my God lightens my darkness” (Ps. 18:28). For there is always some darkness in the saints.

Then when he says, I *have thought it necessary,* he proposes another disciple as an example, namely, Epaphroditus. First, he describes him; secondly, he suggests how he should be received (2:29)., In regard to the first he does three things: first, he praises him; secondly, he states the reason why he is sending him (2:26); thirdly, he explains it (2:27).

He says, therefore: I *have thought it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother and fellow worker and fellow soldier, and your messenger and minister to my need.* He calls him his *brother* on account of the Father: “You are all brethren” (Mt. 23:8); *and fellow worker,* i.e., in the work of preaching: “A brother helped is like a strong city” (Prov. 18:19); *and fellow soldier,* because we have suffered tribulation together: “Take your share of suffering as a good soldier of Christ Jesus” (2 Tim. 2:3); and *your messenger,* i.e., teacher. He was the bishop of the Philippians and sent by them to serve the Apostle; hence he says, *and minister to my need*: “I am filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things you sent, a fragrant offering, a sacrifice, acceptable and pleasing to God” (*infra* 4:18). But why? To satisfy the desire with which *he has been longing for you all:* “For I long to see you” (Rom. 1:11), and also to relieve him of his sorrow, because he was sad at the sorrow you felt, when you heard that he was sick. He explains the reason, saying: *Indeed he was ill, near to death,* i.e., in the opinion of the physicians, though not according to God’s providence, but for the glory of God; “This illness is not unto death; it is for the glory of God” (Jn. 11:4). Thus he continues: *but God had mercy on him;* “Be gracious to me, 0 Lord, for I am languishing” (Ps. 6:2); *and not* only on *him but on me also,* because Paul had suffered the temporal and natural sadness of his affliction, as Christ is said to have suffered sometimes.

Then he concludes by indicating how he should be received and why. He should be received honorably in the Lord, whose minister he is: “You received me as an angel of God, as Christ Jesus” (Gal. 4:14); “Let the elders who rule well be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in preaching and teaching” (1 Tim. 5:17). And this because *he nearly died for the work of Christ,* i.e., for God and the salvation of the faithful: “Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends” (Jn. 15:13); *risking his life:* “The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep” (Jn. 10:11). And he did this, *to complete your service to me,* which you personally could not do.
