# Chapter 2, Lecture 1

> 1 So if there is any encouragement in Christ, any incentive of love, any participation in the Spirit, any affection and sympathy, 2 complete my joy by being of the same mind, having the same love, being in full accord and of one mind. 3 Do nothing from selfishness or conceit, but in humility count others better than yourselves. 4 Let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of others.

Above, he offered himself as an example of patience and holiness; here he presents others as an example of the same: first, he gives the example of Christ; secondly, the examples of his disciples, whom, he promises to send to strengthen them (2:19). In regard to the first he does three things: first, he prefaces his exhortation; secondly, he gives an example (2:5); thirdly, he concludes with the example of Christ (2:12). In regard to the first we must consider: first, the means by which he leads them; secondly, to what he leads them (2:2). In regard to the first he uses four means: first, their devotion to Christ; secondly, their love of neighbor; thirdly, their society; fourthly, their mercy.

He says: So if *there is any encouragement in Christ, any incentive of love, any participation in the Spirit, any affection and sympathy.* These four means which were mentioned all refer to his request: *complete my joy.* The meaning is as though he were saying: I want to be consoled in you. *If there is any encouragement in Christ,* i.e., if you wish to afford me consolation in Christ, *complete my joy:* “To grant to those who mourn in Zion-to give to them a garland instead of ashes, the oil of gladness instead of mourning” (Is. 61:3); “Who comforts us in all our affliction, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction, with the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God” (2 Cor. 1:4). As for fraternal charity he says, if *any incentive of love... complete my joy:* “The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace” (Gal. 5:22); “Behold, how good and pleasant it is when brothers dwell in unity” (Ps. 13-3: 1).

As for that special fellowship which prevails among men who share various things, as soldiers share the arms of warfare, he says, if *any participation in the Spirit* between me and you, *complete my joy.* As if to say: I have afforded you much consolation; therefore, if you are my companions, afford the same to me: “Eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace”. (Eph. 4:3); “There is a friend who sticks closer than a brother” (Prov. 18:24). As to their mercy he says, if *any affection and sympathy:* “Put on then, as God’s chosen ones, holy and beloved, compassion, kindness (Col. 3:12).

Then he indicates what he is urging them to do: first, in general, when he says, *complete my joy.* As if to say: I always rejoice in you on account of the good things I have seen and heard of you; but when these multiply, my joy will grow and finally become perfect. Therefore, complete it, by making progress in good. Secondly, in particular, when he urges them to mutual love, whose unity consists in two things: first, in the affections: “Let us not love in word or speech but in deed and in truth” (1 Jn. 3:18), bearing on the object of charity; hence he says, *being of the same mind.* For wisdom in the mind is knowledge of the loftiest causes, because it pertains to wisdom to judge, and no one can do this without knowing the highest cause. Consequently, wisdom is concerned with divine things. Therefore, *being of the same mind.* As if to say: Have the same mind in regard to the things of faith: “May the God of steadfastness and encouragement grant you to live in such harmony with one another, in accord with Christ Jesus, that together you may with one voice glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ” (Rom. 15:5). But this depends on having the same charity; hence he says, *having the same love:* “And above all these put *on love, which binds everything together in perfect harmony” (Col. 3:14). As for its effect, which consists in two persons consenting to the same thing, two things are required. As to the first he says, *being in full accord,* namely, in acting: [“God makes men of one way to dwell in one house” (Ps. 67:7)]; “That together you may with one voice glorify God” (Rom. 15:6). As to the second he says, *and of one mind.* This differs from the statement *being of the same mind,* as *being in full accord* differs from *having the same love.*

Then he exhorts them to humility: first, he excludes whatever is contrary to humility; secondly, he exhorts them to it. The things contrary to humility are those which spring from pride: one is outward contention, because the humble yield to one another: “By insolence the heedless make strife” (Prov. 13:10); “For where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there will be disorder and every vile practice” (Jas. 3:16). Therefore, he says, *do nothing from selfishness.* The other is vainglory, for a proud person desires his own excellence, even in the opinion of others: “Let us have no self-conceit, no provoking of one another, no envy of one another” (Gal. 5:26); I do not seek my own glory; there is One who seeks it and he will be the judge” (in. 8:50). Thus, he says here, *or conceit. This is* followed by the admonition, *but in humility count others better than yourselves.* For just as it pertains to pride that a man extol himself above himself, so to humility that he restrain himself according to his limitations.

But how can a superior person do this? For he either does not know that he is superior and virtuous, and then he is not virtuous, because be is not prudent; or he does know, and then he cannot consider some as superior to himself. I answer that no one is so good that there is no defect in him, or so evil that he has no good. Therefore, he should not prefer another to himself absolutely, but because he can say in his mind: “Perhaps there is some defect in me that is not in this other person.” Augustine shows this in the book *On Virginity,* when he recommends that a virgin prefer a married woman to herself on the ground that she may be more fervent. But suppose that one person is good from every aspect, and another evil; nevertheless, you and he bear a double person, namely, yours and Christ’s. Therefore, if you cannot prefer him to yourself by reason of his person, you can do so by reason of the divine image: “Outdo one another in showing honor” (Rom. 12:10).

Thirdly, he urges them to mutual care, saying *let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of others:* “That the members may have the same care for one another” (1 Cor. 12:25); “Love does not insist on its own way” (1 Cor. 13:5).
