# Chapter 1, Lecture 4

25 Convinced of this, I know that I shall remain and continue with you all, for your progress and joy in the faith, 26 so that in me you may have ample cause to glory in Christ Jesus, because of my coming to you again. 27 Only let your manner of life be worthy of the gospel of Christ, so that whether I come and see you or am absent, I may bear of you that you stand firm in one spirit, with one mind striving side by side for the faith of the gospel, 28 and not frightened in anything by your opponents. This is a clear omen to them of their destruction, but of your salvation, and that from God. 29 For it has been granted to you that for the sake of Christ you should not only believe in him but also suffer for his sake, 30 engaged in the same conflict which you saw and now hear to be mine.

Having stated the doubt and the reason for both sides, he then resolves it: first, as though choosing one side, he foretells what will be the result of his plan to visit them; secondly, he shows what is required on their part (1:26). In regard to the first he does three things: first, he mentions his coming visit; secondly, he shows its fruit; thirdly, he explains this fruit.

He says, therefore: After saying that to remain in the flesh is necessary for you, because my life is fruitful for you, I *know that I shall remain,* being as it were *convinced of this* in God: “The righteous are bold as a lion” (Prov. 28: 1); 1 *shall remain and continue,* i.e., I shall live and continue to live. But on the other hand he was soon killed by Nero. I answer that this letter was written in the first year of his imprisonment, which was also the first year of Nero’s reign. Hence he lived for seven years after this.

*With you all,* i.e., for the benefit of all of you: “I do not seek my own advantage, but that of many, that they may be saved” (1 Cor. 10:33). And this, *for your progress,* i.e., that through my exhortation you may progress in the faith and rejoice in my life, which you have heard about; but you would rejoice more, if I were present: I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift to strengthen you” (Rom. 1:11).

Then he explains what he had said, saying, *so that in me you may have ample cause to glory,* i.e., if it is granted me to come to you again, it will be in order that joy may abound in you: “Now to him who by the power at work within us is able to do far more abundantly than all that we ask or think, to him be glory in the church” (Eph. 3:20). And this *in Christ Jesus,* because the fact that they rejoiced in him was for the sake of Christ: I want some benefit from you in the Lord!’ (Philem. 1:20).

Then when be says, *only let your manner of life be worthy of the gospel of Christ,* be shows what is required on their part. He says that the only thing required of them is that they live worthy of the gospel of Christ, in a manner that conforms to that gospel: “We exhorted each one of you and encouraged you and charged you to lead a life worthy of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and glory” (1 Thess. 2:12); “To lead a life worthy of the Lord, fully pleasing to him” (Col. 1: 10). And this is my joy: “No greater joy can I have than this, to hear that my children follow the truth” (3 Jn. 4). Now he specifically desires from them unity and constancy. There are three kinds of unity required of the saints: first, the unity of love; hence he says, *that I may hear,* namely, *that you stand firm in one spirit,* through love: “Eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace” (Eph. 4:3), and in 1 Corinthians (6:17) “He who is united to the Lord becomes one spirit with him.” Secondly, the unity of concord; hence he says, *with one mind,* i.e., have one will and one soul: “Now the company of those who believed were of one heart and soul” (Acts 4:32); [“God makes men of one way to dwell in one house”] (Ps. 67:7). Thirdly, the unity of cooperation; hence he says, *striving side by side for the faith of the gospel,* i.e., one helping the other. This is brought about by what is stated in 1 Kings (25: 1) “All Israel assembled and mourned for him,” namely, Samuel; “A brother helped is like a strong city” (Prov. 18:19).

Secondly, he expects constancy: *and not frightened in anything by your opponents.* First, he urges them to be brave, because their opponents can do only as much as God allows: “But not a hair of your head will perish” (Lk. 21:18); “Its leaf does not wither” (Ps. 1: 3); “Who are you that you are afraid of man who dies, of the son of man who is made like grass?” (Is. 51:12). There are three reasons for this: the first is taken from the fruit of tribulation. He says, therefore: *not frightened,* because there is fruit for you in that persecution which *to them,* i.e., to the persecutors, is a *clear omen of their destruction;* but to you it is a cause *of salvation:* “Whoever would save his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it” (Mt. 16:25); “He who loves his life loses it” (Jn. 12:25); “I will destroy you, O Israel; who can help you?” (Hos. 13:9). And this *from God,* from whom *it has been granted to you* to endure tribulation patiently.

The second reason is that you *should believe in him:* “For by grace you have been saved through faith” (Eph. 2:8), which is the great and first gift; *but also suffer for his sake,* which is a greater gift, namely, that you should act for Christ as his athlete: “Then they left the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the name” (Acts 5:41). This is useful and honorable; hence you should act bravely.

The third reason is taken from his example, because he deals with them as people who are the first fruits of the faith. Hence he says, *engaged in the same conflict which you saw to be mine,* namely, when among you I was naked and beaten by the Philippians because I freed the girl with the spirit of divination (Acts 16); *and now hear to be mine,* who am in prison.
