# Chapter 3, Lecture 3

> 15 Let those of us who are mature be thus minded; and if in anything you are otherwise minded, God will reveal that also to you. 16 Only let us hold true to what we have attained. 17 Brethren, join in imitating me, and mark those who so have as you have an example in us. 18 For many, of whom I have often told you and now tell you even with tears, live as enemies of the cross of Christ. 19 Their end is destruction, their god is the belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things. 20 But our commonwealth is in heaven, and from it we await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, 21 who will change our lowly body to be like his glorious body, by the power which enables him even to subject all things to himself.

Above he showed how he was wanting in final perfection; now he urges others to have the same attitude: first, he gives an exhortation; secondly, what is necessarily expected of them (3:16).

He says: *Let those* of *us who are mature be thus minded,* namely, think what I think, i.e., that I am not perfect. But if we are perfect, bow can we think that we are not perfect? I answer that some are perfect with the perfection of this life, but not with the perfection of the life of heaven, namely, when their entire intention will be actually borne toward God; but in this life they are perfect habitually when they do nothing contrary to God.

He says, *those of us,* because the more perfect a person is the more imperfect he considers himself to be: I had heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees thee; therefore I despise myself, and repent in dust and ashes” (Job 42:5); “Solid food is for the mature, for those who have their faculties trained by practice to distinguish good from evil” (Heb. 5:14).

*And if in anything you are otherwise minded, God will reveal that also to you.* Four renditions of this are found in a Gloss: the first two are more literal. One is this: I say that you should think as I do, namely, that you are imperfect; yet if you think otherwise, i.e., better of yourselves than I do of myself, this very thing has been granted to you by divine revelation: and when something loftier is revealed to you than to me, I will not contradict but will yield to your revelation. Nevertheless, I do not want you to separate from the unity of the Church because of this revelation; but in unity, let us hold *true to what we have attained.* This unity consists in the unity of the truth of faith and the rectitude of good action; and both must be preserved: “Mend your ways, heed my appeal, agree with one another, live in peace” (2 Cor. 13:1-1). And the same holds for a good life and good actions: “Peace and mercy be upon all who walk by this rule, upon the Israel of God “Gal. 6:16). Or another way: I say that if on account of ignorance or weakness you think otherwise than the truth holds, let us admit it humbly and do not defend it stubbornly: “Thou hast hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to babes” (Mt. 11:25). Or another way: I say that we should be of the same mind, namely, that we have not yet made it our own; but if in anything you are now otherwise minded than you will be in the future, because “now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face” (1 Cor. 13:12), *God will reveal* it in the future: “The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness,... and strips the forests bare; and in his temple all cry Glory!” (Ps. 29:9). Or another way: Whether you understand dimly here, or clearly in the future, *God will reveal that,* because faith is from God. *Only let us hold true to what we have attained.*

Then when he says, *join in imitating me,* be urges them to imitate him and others, but to avoid the wicked- first, he makes his point; secondly, he gives the reason (3:18).

He says, therefore: Because I regard these things as dung, that I may gain Christ, *brethren, join in imitating me* in this: “The sheep hear his voice” (Jn. 10:3). 1 am the shepherd; you are my sheep by imitating me: “Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ” (1 Cor. 11:1), *and mark,* i.e., carefully consider, *those who so live as you have an example in us.* And you can tell from my example and doctrine: “Set the believers an example in speech and conduct, in love, in faith, in purity (1 Tim. 4:12); “Being examples to the flock” (1 Pet. 5:3).

Then when he says, that *many live as enemies of the cross of Christ,* he gives the reason for his admonition: first, on the part of those to be avoided; secondly, of those to be followed (3:20). But lest this admonition seem to proceed from hatred: first, he mentions his affection; secondly, he describes the ones to be avoided (3:18b).

He says, therefore: I say that the ones to follow should be watched, because some walk otherwise, namely, from bad to worse: “They walk about in darkness” (Ps. 82:5). *Of whom I have often told you,* when I was with *you, and now tell you even with tears* of compassion: “0 that my head were waters and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!” (Jer. 9:1). He gives the reason for this when he says, *enemies of the cross of Christ.* First, he describes them from their work; secondly, from their intention (3:19). In regard to the first: first, he mentions their work; secondly, he shows the results of their work (3: 19).

Their work is to practice enmity against the cross of Christ, namely, those who say that no one can be saved without observing the ceremonies of the Law, in which they nullify the power of the cross of Christ: “For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God” (1 Cor. 1: 18). And what will be the result? Certainly to us life through the cross of Christ; but to the others the opposite, because they incur death. Hence he says, *their end is destruction,* i.e., eternal death.

Then he describes their intention: first, he reveals their intention; secondly, the result of that intention (3:19). He says: *their god is the belly. As* if to say: they spread this doctrine, namely, that the ceremonies of the Law must be observed, for their own gain and glory to satisfy their belly: “For such persons do not serve our Lord Christ, but their own belly, and by fair and flattering words they deceive the hearts of the simpleminded” (Rom.. 16:18); “All the toil of man is for his mouth, yet his appetite is not satisfied” (Eccl. 6:7). Hence he says *god,* because it is peculiar to God to be the first principle and the ultimate end; hence those who have something as an end have it as their God. Furthermore, they seek their own glory against what is stated in John (8:50): “Yet I do not seek my own glory; there is One who seeks it and he will be the judge.” The result will be *their shame:* “I will change their glory into shame” (Ho. 4:7). This is the way things will turn out for those whose minds are fixed on earthly things, i.e., those whom earthly things please and who seek them. They will be ashamed because their state passes; “If you live according to the flesh you will die” (Rom. 8:13).

Then he describes the ones to be imitated when he says, *our commonwealth is in heaven.* First, he describes the heavenly commonwealth in them; secondly, their expectation (3-20b); thirdly, its usefulness (3:21).

He says: they seek earthly things, but not we, because *our commonwealth is in heaven,* i.e., is made perfect by contemplation: “We look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen; for the things that are seen are transient, but the things that are unseen are eternal” (2 Cor. 4:18); and by affection, because we love only heavenly things; and by our actions, in which there is a representation of heaven: “Just as we have borne the image of the man of dust, we shall also bear the image of the man of heaven” (1 Cor. 15:49).

But why is our commonwealth there? Because that is the source from which we expect the most help: I lift up my eyes to the bills from whence my help comes” (Ps. 121: 1); “For where your treasure is there will your heart be also (Mt. 6:21). Hence be says, *and from it we await a Savior:* “Blessed are the eyes that look for him” (Is. 30:18); “Be like men who are waiting for their master to come home from the marriage feast, so that they may open to him at once when he comes and knocks” (Lk. 12:36).

This coming involves three things: first, the general resurrection; hence he says, *who will change our lowly,* because it is subject to death, *body:* “Man, who is a maggot, and the son of man, who is a worm” (Job 25:6); “What is sown is perishable, what is raised is imperishable. It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power” (1 Cor. 15:42). This abject body *He will change* [ *reform* ], i.e., reduce it to His form: “He who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will give life to your mortal bodies also through his Spirit which dwells in you” (Rom. 8:11).

Secondly, the imitation of the saints; hence he says, *to be like his glorious body.* The body of Christ, of course, is glorified by the glory of His divinity; and He merited this by His passion. Therefore, whoever shares in the power of the divinity by grace and imitates the passion of Christ shall be glorified: “He who conquers, I will grant him to sit with me on my throne, as I myself conquered and sat clown with my Father on his throne” (Rev. 3:21); “We shall be like him” (1 Jn. 3:2); “Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father” (Mt. 13:43). Thirdly, the power by which He does this: *by the power* of his Godhead, i.e., by the power in Him *which enables him even to subject all things to himself:* for all will be subject to Christ; some unto salvation, and some unto punishment. Toward the first He will exercise mercy, and toward the second justice: “Thou hast given dominion over the works of thy hands” (Ps. 8:6); “For God has put all things in subjection under his feet” (1 Cor. 15:27); “Whatever the Father does, that the Son does likewise” (Jn. 5:19).
