# Chapter 1, Lecture 1

> 1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, 2 To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father.

3. – This letter is divided into its greeting and its message (1:3). First, the persons sending the letter are mentioned; then, the ones to whom it is sent (1:2); and thirdly, the good things desired for the latter (1:2b). As to the first, the principal sender is mentioned; and secondly, his companion.

4. – The principal sender of this letter is first identified by his name, Paul, that is, one who is humble, for it is such persons who receive wisdom: “Thou hast hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to babes” (Mt 11:25), and so Paul can teach this wisdom. Secondly, the sender is described by his office, namely, an apostle, that is, one who is sent, to bring salvation to the faithful: “Set apart for me Saul and Barnabas for the work to which I have called them” (Acts 13:2); “As the Father has sent me, even so I send you” (Jn 20:21). He is not the apostle of just anyone, but of Christ Jesus, whose glory he seeks, and not his own: “For what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, with ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake” (2 Cor. 4:5). But at times some reach their office because God is angry because of a people’s sins: “Who makes a man who is a hypocrite to reign for the sins of the people” (Job 34:30); “I have given you kings in my anger” (Hos 13:11). And so Paul says that he has his office by the will of God, that is, by his pleasure: “I will give you shepherds after my own heart, who will feed you with knowledge and understanding” (Jer 3:15).

5. – The other person to send this letter is Timothy our brother, so that there may be two or three witnesses, as in Deuteronomy (17:6). “A brother helped is like a strong city” (Pr 18:19).

6. – The persons to whom this letter is sent are the saints and faithful brethren at Colossae. The greater ones are called saints: “Let us serve him in holiness and righteousness” (Lk 1:74); and the lesser ones are referred to as the faithful, who have at least kept the true faith, because “without faith it is impossible to please God” (Heb 11:6). Or we could say, to the saints, that is, to those sanctified by baptism, and faithful brethren, that is, those who have remained in the faith they accepted: “A faithful man will be much praised,” as we read in Proverbs (28:20).

7. – Then he mentions the good things he wishes them to have: that is, grace, which is the source of every good: “Justified by his grace as a gift” (Rom 3:24); and peace, which is the last of all goods: “He makes peace in your borders” (Ps 147:14). As a consequence, he wishes them all the goods that lie between these two. “The Lord will give grace and glory” (Ps 84:11). From the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, the Father of Christ by nature, and our Father by grace; and from the Lord Jesus Christ [Vulgate]. And so, from our Father, that is, God in his Trinity, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, considering the nature God assumed.
