# Chapter 3, Lecture 4

18 Wives, be subject to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord. 19 Husbands, love your wives, and do not be harsh with them. 20 Children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the Lord. 21 Fathers, do not provoke your children, lest they become discouraged. 22 Slaves, obey in everything those who are your earthly masters, not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing the Lord. 23 Whatever your task, work heartily, as serving the Lord and not men, 24 knowing that from the Lord you will receive the inheritance as your reward; you are serving the Lord Christ. 25 For the wrong-doer will be paid back for the wrong he has done, and there is no partiality. 4:1 Masters, treat your slaves justly and fairly, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.

171. – Having given a general direction to all, Paul now begins to give particular directions. First, he gives special directions which relate to the various states found in the Church; secondly, certain directions which apply to all states in certain conditions (4:2). There are three special directions, according to the three kinds of relationships the Philosopher finds in domestic society: that of husband and wife; father and child; and the master and slaves (v. 22). Each of these is divided into two parts insofar as he urges subjects to obey and their superiors to govern with moderation.

172. – He says, wives, be subject to your husbands, and adds, as is fitting, because this has been decreed by God’s law: “You shall be under your husband’s power, and he shall have dominion over you” (Gen 3:16); “The women should keep silence in the churches. For they are not permitted to speak, but should be subordinate, as even the law says” (1 Cor 14:34). The reason for this is that ruling is a function of reason; and because men’s reason is stronger, they should preside. He adds, in the Lord, because all things directed to certain ends must ultimately be referred to God.

173. – Then, he instructs husbands to love their wives, husbands, love your wives; because this is natural, since a husband and wife are in a certain sense one: “Husbands, love your wives, as Christ loved the Church” (Eph 5:25). He forbids them to be bitter: “She who is bitter becomes weak in doing good” (Mic 1:12), “Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and slander be put away from you, with all malice” (Eph 4:31).

174. – Then he deals with the second relationship, and says, children, obey your parents in everything, that is, everything that is not contrary to God: “We have had earthly fathers to discipline us and we respected them” (Heb 12:9). But if they command anything which is contrary to God, then we must remember what is said in Luke: “If any one comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple” (14:26). This is to be done for this pleases the Lord, that is, it is in the Lord’s law, because the law of charity does not destroy the law of nature, but perfects it. And it is a natural law that a child is subject to the care of his father: “Honor your father and your mother” (Ex 20:12).

175. – Then when Paul says, fathers, do not provoke your children, he instructs parents: “Fathers, do not provoke your children to anger” (Eph 6:4). They should not do this lest they become discouraged, that is, faint-hearted. Paul gives this advice because adults keep the impressions they have had as children. And it is natural for those raised in slavery to be always faint-hearted. This is the reason why some say that the children of Israel were not immediately led into the promised land: they had been raised in slavery, and would not have had the courage to fight against their enemies: “Say to those who are of a fearful heart: Be strong, fear not!” (Is 35:4).

176. – Next, he considers the third relationship. First, he instructs the slaves; secondly, he gives the reason for what he says (v. 24); and thirdly, he clears up a question (v. 25). As to the first, he does two things: first, he tells them to obey; and secondly, how to obey.

177. – He says, slaves, according to your state in this world, obey in everything, that is, in everything that is not against God, those who are your earthly masters: “Not only to the kind and gentle but also to the overbearing” (1 Pet 2:18); “Let all who are under the yoke of slavery regard their masters as worthy of all honor” (1 Tim 6:1).

178. – Then when he says, not with eye-service, he teaches them how they are to obey. He shows them two ways to obey: first, with simplicity and without trickery; secondly, willingly. So Paul says, not with eye-service, that is, not merely to the extent that they can be seen by their master. This same idea is found in Ephesians (6:6). He says, not as men-pleasers, for such persons serve merely to please men. As Galatians says (1:10): “If I were still pleasing men, I should not be a servant of Christ”. And therefore he adds, but in singleness of heart, that is, without trickery, fearing the Lord, as in Job (1:1): “That man was simple and upright, and feared God”; “The simplicity of the upright guides them” (Prov 11:3). Further, they should serve willingly; and so Paul says, whatever your task, work heartily, that is, readily. And they are to do this as serving the Lord, because one who serves another because it is the right thing to do does this because of God, the source of what is right: “He who resists the authorities resists what God has appointed” (Rom 13:2); “Doing the will of God from the heart, rendering service with a good will as to the Lord and not to men” (Eph 6:6).

179. – Next, he gives two reasons why they should serve this way. The first considers their reward, and the second considers their devotion to God. So Paul says: Serve readily, because from the Lord you will receive the eternal inheritance as your reward: “The lines have fallen for me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage” (Ps 16:6); “Knowing that whatever good any one does, he will receive the same again from the Lord, whether he is a slave or free” (Eph 6:8). Some people were of the opinion that it is not meritorious to accomplish an act of justice, because this seems to be owed to someone, and it is not meritorious to give to someone what is his due. But we should remember that by the very fact that we do this voluntarily, we are doing something of ourselves, because it is in our power to will or not to will; and so such an act is meritorious. Now slaves serve their masters because they owe this to them; and therefore, in order to receive their reward, they should do this voluntarily. But they should serve their masters in such a way that they do not separate themselves from God. The second reason for serving this way is that this is the way one serves the Lord; as we read in Romans (12:11): “Be aglow with the Spirit, serve the Lord.”

180. – Then (v. 25), he clears up a question. For a slave might ask: How can I serve a person who harms me? And so Paul replies. It is not up to you to take revenge by taking away from him what is his; rather, wait for the one who can, for the wrong-doer will be paid back for the wrong he has done: “For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may receive good or evil, according to what he has done in the body” (2 Cor 5:10); “There is no partiality with him [God] “ (Eph 6:9); and also in Acts (10:34): “God shows no partiality”.

181. – Next, Paul shows how masters should treat their slaves. He does two things: first, he gives his instructions, secondly, the reason for them. There are two ways a master can oppress his slaves. First, by acting unjustly against them by violating the laws, for according to the laws a master cannot be cruel to his slaves. And so Paul says that masters should treat their slaves justly. Secondly, by demanding that their slaves accomplish absolutely all their duties, which a Christian gentleness would soften; and so Paul says, fairly: “If I have rejected the cause of my manservant or my maidservant, when they brought a complaint against me; what then shall I do when God rises up?” as we read in Job (31:13). Then when he says, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven, Paul gives the reason why they should act this way, and it is this: just as you act towards your slaves, so the Lord will act towards you: “Knowing that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven” (Eph 6:9).
