# Chapter 41

1 Finally, brethren, we beseech and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that as you learned from us how you ought to live and to please God, just as you are doing, you do so more and more. 2 For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus. 3 For this is the will of God, your sanctification: that you abstain from immorality; 4 that each one of you know how to take a wife for himself in holiness and honor, 5 not in the passion of lust like heathen who do not know God; 6 that no man transgress, and wrong his brother in this matter, because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as we solemnly forewarned you. 7 For God has not called us for uncleanness, but in holiness. 8 Therefore whoever disregards this, disregards not man but God, who gives his Holy Spirit to you. 9 But concerning love of the brethren you have no need to have any one write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by God to love one another; 10 and indeed you do love all the brethren throughout Macedonia. But we exhort you, brethren, to do so more and more, 11 to aspire to live quietly, to mind your own affairs, and to work with your hands, as we charged you; 12 so that you may command the respect of outsiders, and be dependent on nobody.

Earlier, the Apostle Paul commended the faithful for their loyalty in the face of trials and for other good practices; here Paul cautions them to act well in the future. First, Paul presents a general warning; secondly, Paul makes it more specific (4:3). In regard to the first point, Paul does two things. First he presents what he is intent upon; secondly, he indicates a reason for the warning (4:1b). So Paul says: I heard about your good practices of the past, but in the future we will continue to exhort you. So Paul prevails upon them, first, on his own behalf when he remarks, *we beseech you,* “Pray for the peace of Jerusalem” (Ps. 122:6). In addition, Paul prevails upon them on behalf of Christ, and so he says, *and we exhort you in the Lord Jesus.* And he exhorts them, because they are holy: “Do not rebuke an older man but exhort him as you would a father” (1 Tim. 5: 1).

But what does Paul ask? *That as you learned from us how you ought to live and to please God, just as you are doing, you do so more and more.* The Apostle had taught them how they should conduct themselves in the practice of common justice, which is by keeping the precepts; that is why he says: you *learned from us how you ought to live.* “I will ran in the way of thy commandments” (Ps. 119:32). Paul had also taught them how they might be pleasing to God in the practice of the counsels: “There was one who pleased God and was loved by him” (Wis. 4: 10); or *how you ought to live,* that is, by virtuous actions. “Walk while you have the light” (Jn. 12:35); *and to please God* through the forming of good intentions. *just as you are doing,* that is, that they might remain steadfast in the original teaching, without falling away from it: “But even if we, or an angel from heaven, should preach to you a gospel contrary to that which we preached to you, let him be accursed” (Gal. 1:8).

The reason for the warning is based on the benefit to be derived from heeding the warning; secondly, from the warning itself (4:2). Paul remarks: although you are good, nevertheless you shall grow markedly and improve through the repeated practice of the precepts and counsels. “God is able to provide you with every blessing in abundance” (2 Cor. 9:8). For charity is so encompassing that there will always be something left through which one might improve himself. Also, if difficulties are removed because of the warning, it is both proper and useful. “The law of the Lord is perfect, reviving the soul” (Ps. 19:7). “For the commandment is a lamp and the teaching a light, and the reproofs of discipline are the way of life” (Prov. 6:23). Paul then says: *what instructions,* that is, what kind of commandments, and he tells us that they are *through the Lord Jesus*, in that they are given through Him: “For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you” (1 Cor. 11:23). “It was declared at first by the Lord, and it was attested to us by those who heard him” (Heb. 2:3). The precepts are as follows: *this is the will of God, your sanctification,* as if saying: All the commandments of God are for the purpose of making you holy; for sanctity means purity and constancy, and all of God’s precepts lead thereto, so that a person may be cleansed from evil and constant in good: “That you may prove what is the will of God” (Rom. 12:2) which is made known through the precepts.

Then when Paul says: *that you abstain,* he warns them in particular; and, first, he corrects them in regard to certain inordinate practices prevalent among them; secondly, he urges them to maintain their virtuous actions (5:1). There were three inordinate practices prevalent among them, namely, carnal vices among a certain number of them, curiosity, and an inordinate grief for the dead. For these reasons Paul speaks about these matters. About the second inordinate practice Paul remarks in (4:9); the third inordinate practice he treats in (4:13).

In treating the first inordinate practice he does two things. First, he instructs them to refrain from the inordinate desire for carnal things; secondly, he provides a reason for this (4:6). And so he divides the first point into two. First, he forbids lust; secondly, he forbids greed. He always associates these two, for each one has reference to a corporeal object, although the latter culminates in spiritual delight.

Paul first teaches them to beware of lust in regard to a woman who is not their wife; secondly, in regard to one’s own wife (4:4). Therefore Paul insists, *that you abstain from immorality,* for it is God’s will to abstain from immorality. Therefore, it is a mortal sin, for it is contrary to the commandment and the will of God. “Beware, my son, of all immorality” (Tob. 4:12). But also with regard to your wife, deny yourself honorably; *that each one of you know how to take* [ *his vessel* ], that is his wife, *in holiness,* denying yourself pleasure for a time, *and in honor, not in the passion of lust,* that is, do not let passion be the stimulus; *like heathen,* for it is characteristic of heathens to desire immediate pleasures instead of those of the future life. *In holiness and honor,* because this is the proper use of marriage, since it is for the good of the offspring or for fulfilling an obligation; and so marriage may be without sin. But sometimes a venial sin is involved, if concupiscence is not exercised beyond the limits of marriage, that is, when, although having concupiscence, a person does not indulge it except with his own wife. But when this takes place outside the bonds of marriage, the action becomes a mortal sin; and this happens when he would perform the action, even if she were not his wife, and more willingly with another woman. “Let marriage be held in honor among all, and let the marriage bed be undefiled; for God will judge the immoral and adulterous” (Heb. 13:4). “Likewise you husbands, live considerately with your wives, bestowing honor on the woman as the weaker sex, since you are joint heirs of the grace of life, in order that your prayers may not be hindered” (I Pet. 3:7).

Then when Paul says, *that no man transgress,* he forbids greed, and insists *that no man transgress,* that is, no one should exert violence by taking another’s property through brute strength. “Is it not the rich who oppress you?” (Jas. 2:6). *And wrong his brother* through fraud. “Like a basket full of birds, their houses are full of treachery” (Jer. 5:27).

When Paul says: *because the Lord is an avenger in all these things,* the reason for the warning is mentioned. First, Paul attributes it to the divine vengeance; secondly, he shows that this vengeance is justifiable (4:7). Paul exhorts them to refrain from these things, for *the Lord is an avenger. I* warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God” (Gal. 5:21). For God certainly takes vengeance justly. One reason for this is that God has called us, and a second reason is that such actions are contrary to God’s gifts to us. If the Lord calls you to one thing and you do something contrary, then punishment is due. So Paul points out that *God has not called us for uncleanness. “As* he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him” (Eph. 1:4). “Those whom he predestined he also called” (Rom. 8:30). And so Paul concludes: *therefore, whoever disregards this, disregards not man but God,* as if saying: This is the one special reason that I mentioned. The other reason is that these vices are opposed to the Spirit who was given to us. And he who does these things offends the Holy Spirit; so Paul says, *who gives his Holy Spirit to you.* “A man who has violated the law of Moses dies without mercy at the testimony of two or three witnesses. How much worse punishment do you think will be deserved by the man who has spurned the Son of God, and profaned the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and outraged the Spirit of grace?” (Heb. 10:28).

Then when Paul remarks: *But concerning love of the brethren you have no need to have any one write to you,* he discourages them from remaining idle. It should be realized, as Jerome says in the letter to the Galatians, that the Thessalonians were generous, and that it was the custom among the rich to give away a great deal; as a result the poor idly depended on their benefits without looking for work, but rather wasted time in their homes. And so Paul first commends the generosity of the donors, but he is then critical of the idleness of the recipients of the welfare (4: 11). And first then, Paul adds that they do not need to be reminded of the need for charity, but secondly he also advises that they make progress in it (4:10). Paul observes, *but concerning love of the brethren,* that is, in regard to your love for your brothers, you *have no need to have any one write to you.* “Love one another with brotherly affection” (Rom. 12: 10). “Let brotherly love continue” (Heb. 13: 1). And the reason for this is that, you *yourselves have been taught by God,* that is, through the precept in the Law: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself’ (Lev. 19:18). Also, it is clear from the gospel of St. John (13:34) “A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another; even as I have loved you.” Or, you *yourselves have been taught* this by an interior teaching, as is found in John (6:45): “Every one who has heard and learned from the Father comes to me.” And this lesson is gained through the help of the Holy Spirit.

When Paul says: *but we exhort you, brethren, to do so more and more,* he is urging them to make progress in charity. He seemingly insists that since you have charity towards all men, we urge you to make progress in it. And though others may ridicule you, nevertheless devote yourself to charity: “In the house of the righteous there is much treasure” (Prov. 15:6).

Paul next says: *aspire to live quietly.* He is correcting the idle. First, he criticises their idleness; secondly, he indicates how they ought to curtail it; and finally, he provides a reason why they ought to curtail it. He says therefore, *aspire to live quietly.* “...loud and wayward, her feet do not stay at home” (Prov. 7: 11). “We were not idle when we were with you, we did not eat any one’s bread without paying, but with toil and labor we worked night and day, that we might not burden any of you- (2 Thess. 3:7). Paul desires that they combat idleness by performing daily tasks; hence he remarks: *to mind your own affairs.* “Prepare your work outside, get everything ready for you in the field; and after that build your house” (Prov. 24:27).

Paul specifies *your own affairs.* Does this mean that they should take no part in other’s affairs? If so, he would be opposing what is clear in Romans (16:2) “Help her in whatever she may require from you.” I elaborate by pointing out that things occur in a disorderly manner if they are not governed within the limits of reason, for example, when somebody drives himself excessively; they occur in an orderly manner if the dictates of reason are observed in regulating them. The latter is commendable.

*To work with your hands.* “Idleness teaches much evil” (Sir. 33:27). “This was the guilt of your sister Sodom: she and her daughters had pride, surfeit of good, and prosperous ease, but did not aid the poor and needy” (Ez. 16:49). And this is a precept for all those who have no other means of getting the things which enable them to live properly; for it is a law of nature that man care for his body. “If any one will not work, let him not eat” (2 Thess. 3: 10). Now, there are two reasons for this. The first one comes from the duty to set an example for others; so Paul says: so *that you may command the respect of outsiders.* For the unbelievers see your idle life and they detest you. “He must be well thought of by outsiders, or he may fall into reproach and the snare of the devil” (1 Tim. 3:7). The second reason comes from the fact that you should not covet those things that belong to others, and so it is said, *and be dependent on nobody.* “The desire of the sluggard kills him” (Prov. 21:25). “Let the thief no longer steal but rather let him labor” (Eph. 4:28). And therefore, if this idleness is overcome, it will result both in good example and in the repression of desire.
