# Chapter 0

**PROLOGUE**

*Multiplicatae sunt aquae*, et cetera. Gen. VII, 17.

These words are appropriate to the contents of this letter. The Church is symbolized by the *ark,* as is stated in 1 Peter 3, for as in the ark a few souls were saved, the others perishing, so also in the Church a few, that is, only the elect, will be saved.

The “waters” signify tribulations. First, because flooding waters strike like tribulations: “And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house” (Matt. 7:25). Yet the Church is not shaken by the force of the floods; so Matthew adds, “but it did not fall.

Secondly, because water extinguishes fire: “Water extinguishes a blazing fire” (Sir. 3:30). Similarly, tribulations diminish the force of desires so that men do not follow them at will; but they do not diminish the true charity of the Church: “Many waters cannot quench love, neither can floods drown it” (Cant. 8:7).

Thirdly, because waters inundate by flooding: “Water closed over my head” (Lam. 3:54). Yet the Church is not overcome by them: “The waters closed in over me, the deep was round about me; weeds were wrapped about my head” (Jon. 2.6). And just before this, “Yet would I again look upon your holy temple.”

Therefore, the Church is not destroyed but uplifted: first, by lifting the mind to God, as is clear from Gregory: “The evil things which bear down upon us here compel us to go to God.” “And in their distress they seek me” (Ho. 6: 1). Secondly, the Church is raised up through spiritual consolation: “When the cares of my heart are many, thy consolations cheer my soul (Ps. 94-19); “For as we share abundantly in Christ’s sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too” (2 Cor. 1:5). Thirdly, the Church is upraised by increasing the number of the faithful; for God has spread the Church in time of persecution: “But the more they were oppressed, the more they multiplied and the more they spread abroad” (Ex. 1: 12).

It seems then that these words are appropriate to this letter because the Thessalonians stood firm after suffering many tribulations. Let us, therefore, look at the text.
