# Chapter 61

1 Working together with him, then, we entreat you not to accept the grace of God in vain. 2 For he says, “At the acceptable time I have listened to you, and helped you on the day of salvation.” Behold, now is the acceptable time; behold, now is the day of salvation. 3 We put no obstacle in any one’s way, so that no fault may be found with our ministry, 4 but as servants of God we commend ourselves in every way: through great endurance, in afflictions, hardships, calamities, 5 beatings, imprisonments, tumults, labors, watching, hunger;

203. – Having commended the ministry of the apostleship, the Apostle now carries out the ministry entrusted to him for the benefit of his subjects. In regard to this he does two things. First, he exhorts them in general to do all the things that are commonly necessary for a good life; secondly, he urges them in particular to help the saints in Jerusalem (chap. 8). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he urges them to goods that are present; secondly, he commends them for the good they have done in the past (chap. 7). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he admonishes them in general that the grace of God should not be used in vain; secondly, he shows that the grace of God has been conferred on them (v. 2); thirdly, he teaches them in particular how to use the grace mentioned (v. 3).

204. – He says therefore: from the fact that we have the faculty to do good, and this by the grace of God, and we are ambassadors of Christ for this purpose, therefore, working together [helping] by preaching, by examples and by exhortations: “A brother helped is like a strong city” (Prov. 18:19); or helping, namely, God: “We are God’s helpers” (1 Cor. 3:9). But this seems contrary to Isaiah (40:9): “Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord?” (Is. 40:13). Therefore it is not correct to say, helping God. I answer that to help God can be taken to mean that a person gives God the power to do something. In this sense, no one helps God or can help him; or to mean that a person carries out his commandment. Then holy men are said to help God by carrying out his commands. We, I say, so helping do entreat [exhort] you: “He that exhorts, in his exhortation” (Rom. 12:8), not to accept the grace of God in vain. As if to say: let not the reception of grace be useless and vain for you, which it is when a person does not perceive the fruit of the grace he received. This fruit is twofold: the remission of sins: “And this will be the full fruit of the removal of his sin” (Is. 27:9); and that a man by living righteously attain to heavenly glory: “The return [fruit] you get is sanctification” (Rom. 6:22). Therefore, whoever does not use the grace he has received for avoiding sin and obtaining eternal life, receives the grace of God in vain: “I did not run in vain or labor in vain” (Phil. 2:16).

205. – But lest anyone doubt that he has received this grace from God, the Apostle proves that they have already received or are prepared to receive it, saying: For he says, “At the acceptable time I have listened to you. In regard to this he does two things. First, he quotes the Prophet; secondly, he adapts the quotation to his thesis (v. 2b).

206. – He says therefore: I say that you should be prepared to receive this grace fruitfully, which has been conferred on you or prepared for you, for the Lord says as much in Is. (44:8): “In a time of favor I have answered you.” In regard to this it should be noted that the Lord is said to make grace for us either by hearing us in our petitions or by helping us in our actions. But he hears that we might receive what we ask: “If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask God, who gives to all men generously and without reproaching, and it will be given him” (Jas. 1:5); “If the LORD had not been my help, my soul would soon have dwelt in the land of silence” (Ps. 94:17). This grace is of two kinds: prevenient and cooperating, i.e., subsequent, which it is necessary for us to obtain. First of all, prevenient grace, which we ought to desire in order to be accepted by God: “Therefore let every one who is godly offer prayer to you” (Ps. 32:6). As to this he says, At an acceptable time, i.e., for accepting and being put in the state of grace, for in that acceptable time that is done which is done gratuitously: “So also David pronounces a blessing upon the man to whom God reckons righteousness apart from works” (Rom. 4:6). I have listened to you, i.e., accepted you. Or at an acceptable time, i.e., in the time of grace; and in this way prevenient grace is the name given to the grace by which we are freed from sin, and subsequent grace that by which we the virtues and perseverance in good are conferred on us. Secondly, we need cooperating grace, such as David requested in Ps. 23 (v. 6): “Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.” As to this he says, and helped you on the day of salvation, for the time before Christ was not day but night: “The night is far gone, the day is at hand” (Rom 13:12). But the time of Christ is called the day, and not only the day, but the day of salvation. For before there was not salvation, because no one reached the end of salvation, namely, the vision of God. But now, when salvation has been born in the world, men attain to salvation: “And you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins” (Matt. 1:21); “Work out your salvation” (Phil. 2:12). And this is done by the help of cooperating grace, by which we arrive at eternal life through our works: “For God is at work in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure” (Phil. 2:13).

207. – Then he adapts this text to his purpose, saying, Behold, now is the acceptable time. As if to say: the things which the Lord says by the prophet about the time of grace are now being fulfilled, because behold, now is the acceptable time, i.e., for being adorned with grace, through which we are heard by God, because the fulness of time has already come, namely, of the Incarnation of Christ (Gal. 4:4); and this as to the first part of the quotation: “At an acceptable time, O God” (Ps. 69:13). Behold, now is the day of salvation, in which, helped by cooperating grace, we can work for the attainment of eternal salvation: “We must work the works of him who sent me” (Jn. 9:4); “As we have the opportunity, let us do good to all men” (Gal. 6:10).

208. – Then when he says, we put no obstacle, he teaches them the way to use grace conferred on them; first, in general, namely, that they not receive it in vain; secondly, in particular (v. 4b).

209. – He says therefore: use grace in such a way as putting no obstacle in any one’s way. For grace is given for two things: to avoid evil and to do good. Therefore, he teaches these two things, namely, that we avoid evil, in regard to which he says, putting no obstacle in any one’s way. This can be explained in two ways: in one way as referring to the apostles. As if to say: we, helping you, do exhort you. We, I say, giving no offense to any one, because if we were to offend others by a wicked life, our ministry would be blamed and our preaching ridiculed: “The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you” (Rom. 2:24); “If one’s life is despised, it follows that his preaching is scorned” (Gregory). Hence, a public and notorious sinner should beware of preaching; otherwise, he would commit sin: “But to the wicked God says: ‘What right have you to recite my statutes, or take my covenant on your lips?’” (Ps. 50:17). In another way as referring to his subjects. As if to say: we exhort you, that you not receive the grace of God in vain; you, I say, putting no obstacle in any one’s way, i.e., not doing anything that would scandalize others: “Give no offense to Jews or to Greeks or to the church of God” (1 Cor. 10:32); “Decide never to put a stumbling block or hindrance in the way of a brother” (Rom. 14:13). The reason for this is so that no fault may be found with our ministry, i.e., our apostleship. For when subjects behave badly, the blame is put on the prelates: “Maintain good conduct among the Gentiles” (1 Pet. 2:12). Or that the common ministry in regard to you and us, who are ministers of God, not be blamed. We, I say, are ministers of God to fulfil his will in you and in others, but you to fulfil it well in yourselves only: “You shall be called the priests of the LORD, men shall speak of you as the ministers of our God” (Is. 61:6).

210. – Then when he says, but as servants of God we commend ourselves in every way, he teaches them how to use the grace they received for doing good. He says therefore: let us give no offense to anyone, but we commend ourselves, both you and we, in work and word and in all things which pertain to the virtues, such ministers of God as we ought to be, i.e., let us conform ourselves to God by doing his will: “Like the magistrate of the people, so are his officials” (Sir. 10:2); “This is how one should regard us, as servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God” (1 Cor. 4:1).

211. – Then when he says, through great endurance, he shows in particular how we should exhibit ourselves as ministers of God in using the grace conferred on us. And this as to three things: first, as to outward actions, secondly, as to greater devotion (v. 11); thirdly, as to avoiding unbelievers (v. 14). In regard to the first he does three things in keeping with the three things in which external activity consists: first, it consists in enduring evil, and concerning this he says, through great endurance; secondly, in doing good (v. 6); thirdly, in mutual cooperation of good with bad (v. 7b).

212. – To endure evils the virtue of patience is necessary; hence, he says, through great endurance [in much patience]. In regard to this he does three things. First, he exhorts them to patience, because it says in Ps. 91 (v. 15): “They will be well off that they may proclaim” (Ps. 92:14-15, Vulgate); “By your endurance [patience] you will gain your lives” (Lk. 21:19). He says, in much, on account of the many tribulations they meet.

213. – Secondly, he shows the matter patience deals with in general, and this in two ways, namely in evils that come upon them, in regard to which he says, in afflictions [tribulations]: “Patient in tribulation” (Rom. 12:12); “By many tribulations we must enter the kingdom of God” (Ac. 11:21); and in the lack of necessities; hence, he says, in hardships [necessities], namely, of things necessary for life: “Bring me out of my distresses” (Ps. 25:17).

214. – Thirdly, he shows in particular the material with which patience is concerned. First, with things that pertain to tribulations which are voluntary, and this as to the soul. Hence, he says, in calamities [distresses], namely of the heart, when we are so beset with tribulations that there is no way of escape: “Destitute, afflicted, ill-treated” (Heb. 11:37), and then as to the body; hence, he says, in beatings, namely, inflicted by others, and in prisons: “And when they had inflicted many blows upon them, they threw them into prison” (Ac. 16:23); “Far more imprisonments, with countless beatings” (2 Cor. 11:23). In tumults, namely, of an entire people in an uproar: “For we are in danger of being charged with rioting today, there being no cause that we can give to justify this commotion” (Ac. 19:40). Secondly, in things that pertain to necessities. But necessity is sometimes voluntary, and so he says, in labours, by working with his own hands among the Corinthians, so as not to burden them with his support, because they were avaricious; and among the Thessalonians, to give them an example of work because they were idle: “You yourselves know that these hands ministered to my necessities, and to those who were with me” (Ac. 20:34). In watchings, for the sake of preaching: “Through many a sleepless night” (2 Cor. 11:27). In hunger [fasting], sometimes voluntary and sometimes involuntary because of need: “I pommel my body and subdue it” (1 Cor. 9:27)

215. – But this seems to be contrary to what is said in Matt. (11:30): “My yoke is easy and my burden is light,” whereas he says here, in much tribulation. Therefore, it is not sweet but very distasteful. I answer that these are hard in themselves, but they are made sweet by love and an inward fervor of spirit. Hence, Augustine says: “All huge and difficult tasks love makes easy and almost nothing.”
