# Chapter 111

1 I wish you would bear with me in a little foolishness. Do bear with me! 2 I feel a divine jealousy for you, for I betrothed you to Christ to present you as a pure bride to her one husband. 3 But I am afraid that as the serpent deceived Eve by his cunning, your thoughts will be led astray from a sincere and pure devotion to Christ.

371. – After defending himself against the false charges placed against him by the false apostles, the Apostle, in order to refute them, that is, the false apostles, and render his own testimony more honorable, now commends himself to the Corinthians. In regard to this he does two things. First, he assigns the reason for his commendation; secondly, he makes the commendation (v. 21b). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he asks that they bear with his foolishness; secondly, he states why he must commend himself in order not to seem foolish (v. 2); thirdly, he suggests that, granted he is foolish, they should bear with it (v. 16). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he mentions his desire so that his request may be easier to grant; secondly, he makes the request (v. 1b).

372. – The Apostle’s desire is that the Corinthians bear with him as he commends himself; therefore he begins with an optative expression: I wish you would bear with me in a little foolishness. In regard to this it should be noted that the moral precepts deal with actions which, since they are particular and variable, cannot be confined within the limits of one general reason and rule with no exceptions. But sometimes it is necessary to do something beside the common rule in some case that crops up. But when something is done beside the common rule in this way, wise men, who consider the cause of it, are not troubled and do not think it was done foolishly. For example, the moral precept forbids killing, but sometimes it is necessary to kill evil men. When this is done, wise men commend it or do not think it was wicked to have done so, but the undiscerning and less wise, not considering the cause why one acted in this manner, are disturbed and think it was foolish to do. So when the wicked are killed, fools and heretics condemn it, saying it was a wicked thing to do. Therefore, because the common law is that a man should not commend himself, as it says in Prov. (27:2): “Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips”, it could happen in some case beside this common rule, that a man commends himself and is acting praiseworthily; nevertheless, the undiscerning regard it as folly. Therefore, since the Apostle was confronted with a case in which he should commend himself, he urges them not to lay it to his folly, saying, I wish you would bear with me in a little foolishness. He says, little, because were he to commend himself without cause, it would be the utmost folly. Again, if he commended himself for a reason entirely urgent, then there would be no folly involved. But because he is commending himself for a reason not altogether urgent, since he could refute the false apostles in some other way, and because he is commending himself very much, there seems to be some folly there; and that is what he says, in a little foolishness: “I have been a fool! You forced me to it” (2 Cor. 12:11).

373. – But although I am foolish, do bear with me. And they should do this because subjects should uphold their prelates and vice versa: “Bear one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ” (Gal. 6:2); “Forbearing one another in love” (Eph. 4:2).

374. – Then, saying I feel a divine jealousy, he shows the need for this commendation. In regard to this he does three things. First, he shows that a commendation of this sort springs from zeal, to exclude folly; secondly, he says that this zeal is not irregular, to avoid indiscretion (v. 3); thirdly, he rejects their excuse (v. 4). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he mentions the holy zeal he has for them; secondly, the cause of this zeal, because his office obliged him (v. 2b).

375. – His zeal, therefore, is holy, because I feel a divine jealousy for you, i.e., I love you fervently with the jealousy of God, i.e., to God’s honor, not mine. In regard to this it should be noted that jealousy taken as being the same as zeal is nothing more than a good or evil movement of the spirit concerning itself with the state of one’s neighbor, and implies a fervor of love. Consequently, zeal is an intense love that does not permit any sharing of the beloved. If it does not permit any sharing of an evil, say of a vice or some imperfection, but it alone wishes to have the beloved exclusively, then the zeal is good and the jealousy good. Thus it says in 1 Cor. (12:31): “But earnestly desire the higher gifts”; “For a good purpose it is always good to be made much of” (Gal. 4:18); “I have been very jealous for the Lord, the God of hosts” (1 Kg. 19:10); “For zeal for your house has consumed me” (Ps. 69:10). But if it does not allow a sharing in something excellent or in some worldly prosperity, because someone wants it all for himself, then the zeal is evil and the jealousy evil. Now a person is sometimes jealous for his wife, to keep her for himself. This is the way the Apostle was jealous on behalf of his people, whom he saw prepared for a fall and, although espoused to Christ, wished to be prostituted to the devil. Consequently, he would not permit Christ, the true spouse, to suffer their being shared with the devil; hence he says, a divine jealousy. As if to say: Not for me but for Christ, who is the spouse: “He who has the bride is the bridegroom” (Jn. 3:29); “I have been very jealous for the Lord, the God of hosts” (1 Kg. 19:10).

376. – Then he shows from what source the responsibility to be zealous arose, when he says: for I betrothed you to Christ to present you as a pure bride to her one husband. As if to say: it is proper for me to be jealous for you with the jealousy of God, because I am the groomsman of this wedding between you and Christ, i.e., I effected the espousals made by faith and charity: “I will betroth you to me in faithfulness” (Hos. 2:20). Therefore, it is my duty to protect you. So whoever converts the people by faith and charity, espouses them to Christ. I have betrothed you, I say, not to many, because she that adheres to many is defiled: “You have played the harlot with many lovers” (Jer. 3:1), but to one husband, Christ, that is, to a perfect man filled with the virtues: “The Orient is his name” (Zech. 6:12, Vulgate). Christ is called one husband because he is unique both as to the manner of conception (as to the manner of being born), and as to the fullness of grace: “One man among a thousand I found” (Ecc. 7:28). To that husband, I say, I have espoused you to present you a virgin.

377. – Note that he passes from the plural, I have betrothed you, to the singular, to present you as a pure bride, thus showing that from all the faithful is formed one body and one Church, which ought to be a virgin in all its members. For in all, virginity is taken for bodily integrity and chastity for mental integrity; for sometimes a person is a virgin in body, but not chaste in mind. Thus the Church shows herself a virgin when she perseveres in the faith and the sacraments without being corrupted by idolatry and unbelief: “At the head of every street you built your lofty place and prostituted your beauty” (Ez. 16:25). She shows herself chaste when, persevering in the sacraments and in the faith of Christ, she presents herself pure in body and in work: “That he might present the church to himself in splendor, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that she might be holy and without blemish” (Eph. 5:27).

378. – But because the Corinthians could say: it is not necessary for you to protect us, and your zeal is not reasonable, because we can take care of ourselves very well, he discloses the cause of his zeal saying, but I am afraid that as the serpent deceived Eve by his cunning, your thoughts will be led astray [corrupted]. Here it should be noted that in paradise Adam and Eve were married, but Eve was corrupted by the serpent, not with violence, but with craftiness, inasmuch as he promised something false and urged something wicked: false, when he said, “You will be as gods” (Gen. 3:5), and ‘No, you will not die” (Gen. 3:4), even though they did incur guilt as a result; wicked, when he persuaded her to transgress the and ignore God’s command. The Apostle, speaking according to this likeness, says that the Church is like Eve, whom the devil has sometimes persecuted openly by tyrants and potentates, and then “like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour,” as it says in 1 Pet. (5:8); and sometimes he molests the Church in secret by heretics who promise the truth and pretend to be good, and then as the serpent deceived Eve with his subtility by promising false things.

379. – Therefore he says, I am afraid that as the serpent deceived Eve, casting her out of paradise, by his cunning with false promises: “Adam was not deceived, but the woman” (1 Tim. 2:14), so, i.e., by like deceptions of heretics, your thoughts [senses] will be led astray. He says, your senses, because just as in a natural marriage a spouse takes precautions against his bride’s being corrupted carnally, so in this spiritual marriage the Apostle fears that the senses of the heart will be spiritually corrupted: “Bad company ruins good morals” (1 Cor. 15:33). Or the spiritual senses referred to in Wis. (1:1): “Think of the Lord with uprightness”; “Do not be children in your thinking” (1 Cor. 14:20). And from a sincere and pure devotion to Christ [from the simplicity that is in Christ]. That is simple which lacks composition. Therefore, the false apostles formed one sect with Judaism and the Gospel, commanding that the ceremonies of the Law be observed along with the Gospel. Therefore, they fall from the simplicity of Christ, who, being seduced by the false apostles, observe those ceremonies along with the Gospel; and this the Apostle feared about the Corinthians: “The integrity of the upright guides them” (Prov. 11:3).
