# Chapter 12, Lecture 5

14 Here for the third time I am ready to come to you. And I will not be a burden, for I seek not what is yours but you; for children ought not to lay up for their parents, but parents for their children. 15 I will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls. If I love you the more, am I to be loved the less? 16 But granting that I myself did not burden you, I was crafty, you say, and got the better of you by guile. 17 Did I take advantage of you through any of those whom I sent to you? 18 I urged Titus to go, and sent the brother with him. Did Titus take advantage of you? Did we not act in the same spirit? Did we not take the same steps? 19 Have you been thinking all along that we have been defending ourselves before you? It is in the sight of God that we have been speaking in Christ, and all for your upbuilding, beloved.

493. – Here he shows that he is worthy of commendation in regard to good things he intends to do. He does three things. First, he states his resolution concerning the future good he intends to do; secondly, he assigns the reason for this resolution (v. 14c); thirdly, he applies a likeness to his reason (v. 14d).

494. – It should be noted in regard to the first that sometimes it happens that the reason why some do not receive at one time is that they might be keeping themselves in reserve for another time, in which they can receive both more and more boldly. Therefore, lest they suppose something like this of the Apostle, namely, that he refused to take anything from them the first time, in order that he might receive more the second time, he says that he not only did this in the past, but is prepared to do the same in the future; hence he says, Here for the third time I am ready to come to you. And I will not be a burden. As if to say: not even then will I burden you by taking what is yours: “So I refrained and will refrain from burdening you in any way” (2 Cor. 11:9); “I hold fast my righteousness, and will not let it go” (Job. 27:6). He says, here for the third time I am ready to come, and not “this third time I am coming,” because he certainly was prepared to go to them a third time, yet he went only twice. For he was prepared to go the first time; he went and they were converted. He was ready a second time, but he was prevented on account of their sin. It was for this that he apologized in the beginning of this letter. Now he was ready to go a third time, and he went. Hence he went twice, but he was ready to go three times.

495. – Then he gives the reason for this good resolution, when he says: for I seek not what is yours but you. The reasoning is this: it is clear that an artisan arranges his work according to the end he has in view, but when preachers preach, some intend revenue and temporal goods; consequently they arrange and direct all their preaching to this. Others intend the salvation of souls; consequently, they arrange their preaching according as they deem it expedient for the salvation of souls. Therefore, because the Apostle in his preaching aimed at the salvation of the Corinthians and he saw that it was expedient to take no revenue from them, both in order to shame the false apostles and also because they were covetous, he refused to take any revenue. Hence he assigns this reason: I will not burden you by taking anything, because I seek not what is yours by my preaching, but you and your salvation are what I aim to procure: “Not that I seek the gift; but I seek the fruit” (Phil. 4:17). Therefore the Lord said to the apostles: “I will make you fishers of men” (Matt. 4:19), not of money. This is also prefigured in Gen. (chap. 47), where we read that Joseph brought some Egyptians for the service of the king, because the good preacher should be intent upon converting believers to the service of Christ.

496. – He adapts a simile to this reasoning, when he says: for children ought not to lay up for their parents, but parents for their children. First, he presents the simile; secondly, he adapts it (v. 15); thirdly, he criticizes their ingratitude (v. 15b).

497. – He says therefore: I do not seek what is yours. This is clear from a simile. For we observe that parents according to the flesh should lay up for their children, because children ought not to lay up for their parents, but parents for their children. Therefore, since I am your spiritual father and you are my children, I do not want you to lay up for me, but I for you.

498. – But there is a question here about parents according to the flesh, for it says in Ex. (20:12): “Honor your father and your mother,” which includes that we must minister to their needs. Therefore the children are bound to lay up for their parents. I answer that this precept binds children to minister to and help their parents in necessity, but not to gather and lay up for them. For laying up and gathering have an eye on the future. But in nature the children succeed the parents and not vice versa, except in some sad cases. Therefore the love of parents naturally induces them to lay up for the children. It is in this way that the Apostle speaks; but in Ex. (chap. 20) the Lord is speaking about helping them in case of necessity.

499. – Another question that arises concerns the statement that the children should not lay up for their parents, but the parents for the children. Therefore, since prelates are our spiritual parents, it seems that princes and others do wrong when they give their riches to prelates. I answer that they gave them to prelates not for themselves, but for the poor, and this is what the Lord teaches: “Lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumes and where thieves do not break in and steal” (Matt. 6:20). Hence they are given to prelates as dispensers to the poor.

500. – Then he applies the simile, in which he proposed two things: one is that the children should not lay up for the parents, and this is now clear. The other is that parents should lay up for and give to the children; in regard to this he says: therefore, because I am your father, I am ready to give to you, and this is what he says: I will most gladly spend good things on you, not only spiritual goods by preaching and giving examples, but even temporal goods, which he did, inasmuch as he preached to them and served them with the revenues of other churches. Every prelate should minister these three things to his subjects; hence the Lord said to Peter three times: “Feed my sheep” (Jn. 21:17), i.e., food them by word, feed them by example, feed them by temporal subsidies. Not only will I give those things to you, but I am ready to die for your salvation; hence he says, and be spent for your souls: “Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends” (Jn. 15:13); “He laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren” (1 Jn. 3:16); “The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep” (Jn. 10:11).

501. – Then he criticizes their ingratitude when he says, If I love you the more, am I to be loved the less? As if to say: gladly will I be spent for you, although you are ungrateful, because although I love you the more, I am loved the less. This comparison can be explained in two ways. First, in this way: although I love you the more than the other apostles, yet I am loved the less, namely, by you, than the false apostles are loved, whom you love more than me. Thus it is evident that I love you more than they, because I seek only your salvation, but they seek only your goods. In another way thus: although I love you the more than the other churches, nevertheless I am love less by you than by the other churches: “For God is my witness, how I yearn for you all with the affection of Christ Jesus” (Phil. 1:8). That he loved the Corinthians more than he loved the other churches is clear from the fact that he labored more for them. But that for which we labor more, we love more.

502. – Then when he says, But granting that I myself did not burden you, he removes a suspicion. First, he mentions the suspicion; secondly, he excludes it (v. 17); thirdly, he assigns the reason for the exclusion (v. 19).

503. – Their suspicion might be that the reason he did not take anything for himself was that others might take more from them. Therefore, he says: But granting, that is, granting that I myself, in my person and in those who are with me, did not burden you by taking anything, but as you believed, I was crafty and got the better of you by guile, i.e., I took many more of your goods through other persons. But this is false, because I have done nothing by guile: “For our appeal does not spring from error or uncleanness, nor is it made with guile” (1 Th. 2:3). For he was an Israelite indeed, in whom there was no guile (Jn. 1:47).

504. – Then he excludes this suspicion when he says, Did I take advantage of you through any of those whom I sent to you? First, in general; secondly, in particular. In general in the following way: if I had wanted to snatch anything from you by others, I would have sent those who might obtain these things. But did I take advantage of you through any of those whom I sent to you, by using them to extort your goods? As if to say: No: “We have taken advantage of no one”(2 Cor. 7:2); “That no man transgress, and wrong his brother in this matter” (1 Th. 4:6).

505. – He excludes their suspicion in particular when he says: I urged Titus to go, and sent the brother with him. As if to say: none of those whom I sent to you overreached you. For I sent Titus to you with entreaties. And this is what he says: I urged Titus to go, and sent the brother with him, namely, Barnabas or Luke: “With him,” namely Titus, “we are sending the brother,” namely one of those mentioned, “who is famous among all the churches for his preaching of the gospel” (2 Cor. 8:18). But did Titus take advantage of you? As if to say: No: “But thanks be to God who puts the same earnest care for you into the heart of Titus” (2 Cor. 8:16). That Titus did not overreach them he proves by showing that Titus was of the same mind as the Apostle, and he mentions two points of similarity: first, in the heart; hence he says: Did we not act in the same spirit?, i.e., have the same will; or we were inspired by the same spirit to act well and correctly: “Since we have the same spirit of faith as he had who wrote, ‘I believed, and so I spoke,’ we too believe, and so we speak” (2 Cor. 4:13). Secondly, in work; hence he says: Did we not take the same steps, i.e., intent on the same works? That is to say, in the steps of Christ, for I walk in the steps of Christ: “I have kept his way,” namely, Christ’s, “and have not turned aside” (Job 23:11); “Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps” (1 Pet. 2:21). And Titus follows my steps: “Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ” (1 Cor. 11:1). Therefore, if he agrees with me in will and in work, and I have not overreached you and do not intend to overreach you, the conclusion is evident. That he did not overreach them is clear from Matt. (7:16): “By their fruits you shall know them.”

506. – The he adds the reason, which excludes their opinion. First, he states their opinion; secondly, he excludes it (v. 19). Their opinion was that the Apostle, as one guilty and culpable, was writing all the words of this epistle to justify himself, and that they were not true, but merely invented to justify himself. Therefore, he sets down their opinion, saying: Have you been thinking all along, i.e., from the beginning of this epistle, that we have been defending ourselves before you, i.e., that the words of this epistle are not true, but are fabricated as an excuse?

507. – But he excludes this: for a person who excuses himself in that way has two things: one is that he does not use true words, but fabrications; the other is that he was not wont to suffer the loss of reputation and glory. Hence, it is especially because of the loss of reputation that they make excuses. But neither of these is verified in us. Therefore, your opinion is not true. That neither of these is verified in us is clear, because we do not employ false words. This he proves first by God’s testimony, because it is in the sight of God that we are speaking. As if to say: God is my witness, that I speak the truth: “Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven” (Job 16:19) Secondly, by the testimony of Christ, because we have been speaking in Christ, i.e., by Christ in whom there is not falsity: “But as men of sincerity, as commissioned by God, in the sight of God we speak in Christ” (2 Cor. 2:17). Furthermore, we do not seek our own glory or fear loss of reputation, because all things which I have said about my revelations and tribulations, I do or say for your upbuilding, namely, that you continue in virtue and expel the false apostles: “Let us then pursue what makes for peace and for mutual upbuilding.” (Rom. 14:19); “Let all things be done for edification.” (1 Cor. 14:26); “This voice has come for your sake, not for mine” (Jn. 12:30).
