# Chapter 6, Lecture 3

> 11 Our mouth is open to you, Corinthians; our heart is wide. 12 You are not restricted by us, but you are restricted in your own affections. 13 In return—I speak as to children—widen your hearts also. 14 Do not be mismated with unbelievers. For what partnership have righteousness and iniquity? Or what fellowship has light with darkness? 15 What accord has Christ with Belial? Or what has a believer in common with an unbeliever? 16 What agreement has the temple of God with idols? For we are the temple of the living God; as God said, “I will live in them and move among them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 17 Therefore come out from them, and be separate from them, says the Lord, and touch nothing unclean; then I will welcome you, 18 and I will be a father to you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.”

228. – After teaching them the use of grace as to good outward actions, the Apostle now instructs them about this use in regard to internal devotion, which consists in joy of heart, which causes the heart to enlarge. In regard to this he does three things. First, he offers himself as an example of this enlargement; secondly, he shows that they have no contrary example, nor could they have (v. 12); thirdly, he exhorts them to enlarge their hearts (v. 13). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he gives a sign of an expanded heart; secondly, he mentions the expansion of heart he had (v. 11b).

229. – Now the sign of an expanded heart is an open mouth, because it adheres immediately to the heart. Hence, the things we express by the mouth are express signs of the thoughts of the heart: “For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks” (Matt. 12:34). And this is what he says: our mouth is open to you. For the mouth is closed sometimes when the things in the heart are not outwardly apparent, but it is opened when the things in the heart are manifested: “After this Job opened his mouth” (Job 3:1); “And he opened his mouth and taught them” (Matt. 5:2). But that it might not seem to pertain to the vice of vanity that he manifest himself, he gives a reason, saying, to you, i.e., for your benefit we manifest to you the secrets of our heart: “Not seeking my own advantage, but that of many” (1 Cor. 10:33).

230. – The cause of this enlargement comes from enlarging and widening the heart. Hence he says, our heart is wide [enlarged]: “The raising of the eyes is the enlarging of the heart” (Prov. 21:4, Vulgate). But sometimes the heart is narrow, namely, when it is pressed together and confined in a small place, as when a person cares for nothing but earthly things and scorns the heavenly, not being able to grasp them with his mind. But sometimes is it wide, namely, when a person seeks and desires great things. Such was the case with the Apostle, who did not regard the things which are seen, but desired heavenly things. Hence he says, our heart is enlarged, i.e., expanded for desiring great things.

231. – Then he shows that they have no contrary example from the Apostle, saying, You are not restricted by us [straightened]. As if to say: from the fact that we show you the largeness of our heart, you do not have an example or a reason why you should be straightened. But if you do this, then indeed you are straightened, but not by us, but in your own affections, i.e., by yourselves. Here it should be noted that to be straightened is the same as to be enclosed in something, from which no exit appears. But they have been deceived by a false apostle to such a degree that they did not believe salvation was possible without observing legal ceremonies. As a result, they became slaves, whereas they had been free according to the faith of Christ. Hence, the confinement of this slavery did not come to them from the Apostle, but from their bowels, i.e., from the hardness of their hearts: “Do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and your children” (Lk. 23:28).

232. – Then he urges them to enlarge their hearts, saying, In return [having the same recompense], widen your hearts also. As if to say: if you had been deceived and straightened by a false apostle, then do not continue in that state, but try to have a large heart, as we have, because you love the same recompense as we. Therefore he says, having the same recompense as we: “For we know that as you share in our sufferings, so also you share in our consolation” (2 Cor. 1:7). I speak as to children, and not to enemies, as to children of God, namely, heirs of eternal life: “And if children, then heirs” (Rom. 8:17). Having the same recompense, I say, widen your hearts also, i.e., have a large heart and free with the freedom of the Spirit, which is in the faith of Christ, and be not straightened in the slavery of legal observances.

233. – Then when he says, Do not be mismated with unbelievers, he teaches them the use of grace as to avoiding unbelievers. In regard to this he does three things. First, he exhorts them; secondly, the reason for the exhortation (v. 14b); thirdly, he confirms this reason with an authority (v. 16b).

234. – He says therefore, Do not be mismated [bear the yoke] with unbelievers. Here it should be noted that a yoke is anything which binds several to do something. Hence, because some come together sometimes to do something good, which is from God, and some to do something evil, which is from the devil, we speak of God’s yoke and the devil’s yoke. God’s yoke is charity, which binds a man to serve God: “Take my yoke upon you” (Matt. 11:29). But the devil’s yoke is for doing evil: “The yoke of his burden” (Is. 9:4). Therefore he says this: Do not be mismated, i.e., do not take part in works of unbelief, with unbelievers; and this for two reasons. First, because there were some among them who considered themselves wiser, not refraining from idolatry; as a result they scandalized the lowly. But there were others who took part with the Jews in the traditions of their elders. Hence, the Apostle exhorts them and says, do not be mismated with unbelievers, i.e., do not communicate with the Jews in the traditions of the Law or with Gentiles in the worship of idols, for both groups were unbelievers.

235. – He gives the reason for this when he says, For what partnership have righteousness and iniquity? This is based on two distinctions: one regards the cause and the other the state. The distinction as to cause is twofold, namely, as to habitual and as to efficient cause. The habitual cause is also twofold: one as to effect, and this is what he says: For what partnership have righteousness and iniquity [justice with injustice]? As if to say: you should not bear the yoke with unbelievers, because there is one habit in you and another in them. In you it is the habit of justice; in them it is the habit of iniquity. But the higher justice is to render to God what is his, and this is to worship him. Hence, since you worship God, the habit of justice is in you. But the greatest iniquity is to take from God what is his and give it to the devil: “I cannot endure iniquity and solemn assembly” (Is. 1:13); “What has straw in common with wheat” (Jer. 23:28). The other habitual cause is in regard to the intellect; and this distinction is that the faithful are enlightened with the light of faith, but unbelievers are in the darkness of errors. As to this he says, Or what fellowship has light with darkness? As if to say: it is not right for you to communicate with them, because it is not a suitable fellowship, because you are light through knowledge of the faith: “For once you were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord” (Eph. 5:8), but they are darkness through ignorance: “The way of the wicked is like deep darkness” (Prov. 4:19). Hence, from the beginning the Lord separated the light from the darkness, as it says in Gen. (1:18).

236. – As to the efficient cause he says, What accord has Christ with Belial? As if to say: you are the servants of Christ and his members: “Now you are the body of Christ and individually members of it” (1 Cor. 12:27), but they are members of the devil. The devil is called Belial, without a yoke, because he refused to submit to God’s yoke: “For long ago you broke your yoke and burst your bonds” (Jer. 2:20). That there cannot be concord between Christ and Belial is clear from Christ’s words: “For the ruler of this world is coming; he has no power over me” (Jn. 14:30), as well as from the devil’s words: “What have you to do with us, O Son of God?” (Matt. 8:29).

237. – Another distinction regards the state of faith. In regard to this he says, Or what has a believer in common with an unbeliever? As if to say: there is not the same part on both sides, because the part of the believer is God, whom he has as a reward and as the end of his happiness: “The Lord is my chosen portion and my cup” (Ps. 16:5). But the part of the unbeliever is earthly goods: “Because this is our portion and this is our lot” (Wis. 2:9); “And he will punish him and put him with the hypocrites” (Matt. 24:51). As to the state of grace he says, What agreement has the temple of God with idols? As if to say: there is no agreement. Hence, you are a temple of God by grace: “Do you not know that you are God’s temple and that God’s Spirit dwells in you?” (1 Cor. 3:16). Therefore, you should not communicate with unbelievers, who are temples of idols. But it should be noted that in Ez. 25, the Lord forbids idols to be worshipped in God’s temple. Much more then are men forbidden, whose souls are God’s temple, to violate them by partaking of idols: “If any one destroys God’s temple, God will destroy him” (1 Cor. 3:17).

238. – Then when he says, For you are the temple of the living God, he strengthens his reason with an authority. In regard to this he does two things. First, he confirms what he had concluded by reason of an admonition; secondly, he confirms the admonition itself (v. 17). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he reviews what he intends to prove; secondly, he quotes an authority to support his conclusion (v. 17c).

239. – He says therefore: rightly do I say that there is no agreement between the temple of God and idols, i.e., you should not take part in them, because you are the temple of the living God, and not of a dead one, as idolaters are.

240. – To prove this he cites an authority, proving this very point from the use to which a temple is put. For the use of a temple is that God dwell in it, because a temple is a place consecrated for God to dwell in: “The Lord is in his holy temple” (Ps. 11:4). This authority is taken from Lev. (26:11), which says: “And I will make my abode among you”. In this authority four things are touched as pertaining to this use. The first pertains to operating grace, which consists in God’s being is someone through grace; and this is what he says, I will live in them, namely, in the saints, adorning them with grace. For although God is said to be in all things by his presence, power, and essence, he is not said to dwell in them, but only in the saints through grace; the reason being that God is in all things by his activity, inasmuch as he joins himself to them as giving esse and conserving it, but in the saints by their very activity, by which they attain to God and in a way comprehend him, which is to love and to know. For those who know and those who love have within themselves the thing known and loved. The second pertains to cooperating grace, by which the saints make progress with God’s help; as to this he says, I will move among them, i.e., I will promote them from virtue to virtue, for this progress is impossible without grace: “By the grace of God I am what I am” (1 Cor. 15:10). For just as operating grace makes us to be something in the being [esse] of justice, so cooperating grace makes us progress in that being [esse]. The third pertains to God’s benefits: and this is either the benefit of his protection through providence; hence, he touches this when he says, and I will be their God, i.e., I will protect them by my providence: “Happy the people whose God is the Lord” (Ps. 144:15), or the benefit of recompense. As if to say: I will be their God, i.e., I will give them myself as a reward: “Your reward shall be very great” (Gen. 15:1); “Therefore God is not ashamed to be called their God” (Heb. 11:16). The fourth pertains to correct worship and service offered by the saints; as to this he says, and they shall be my people, i.e., they will worship me and obey me as mine and not another’s: “We are the people of his pasture, the sheep of his hand” (Ps. 95:4).

241. – Or they could refer to bodily presence; then it is explained this way: For I will live in them by assuming flesh: “The Word became flesh and dwelt among us” (Jn. 1:14), and I will move among them bodily by living with them: “Afterward she appeared upon earth and lived among men.” (Bar. 3:37), and I will be their God by glory: “For what great nation is there that has a god so near to it as the LORD our God is to us” (Deut. 4:7). And they shall be my people, i.e., they will worship me in faith.

242. – Then when he says, Therefore come out from them, he confirms this admonition with another authority. In regard to this he does two things. First, he confirms the admonition by an authority; secondly, he indicates the reward promised to those who heed the admonition (v. 18).

243. – He says therefore, i.e., because you are temples of God, come out from them: “Depart, depart, go out from there! Touch no unclean thing; go out from the midst of it” (Is. 52:11). Here he says three things: go out, be separated from them, and do not touch anything unclean, because there are three ways we should behave toward unbelievers. First, we should go out from them by abstaining from sins: “Ho! ho! Flee from the land of the north” (Zech. 2:6). But the Donatists say that we must depart bodily from an evil society. But this is not true. Hence, the Apostle’s words must be understood of a spiritual separation and are explained in this way: go out spiritually by not following their life: “As a lily among brambles” (S of S 2:2), and this in order to avoid the very occasions of sin given by them. Hence he says, be separate, i.e., be far from consenting to them: “For I have come to set a man against his father” (Matt. 10:35); “Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men” (Num. 16:26). Thirdly, to rebuke them when they do wrong; hence he says, touch nothing unclean, i.e., do not consent to them in evil: “They not only do them but approve those who practice them” (Rom. 1:32); “Take no part in the unfruitful works of darkness, but instead expose them.” (Eph. 5:11). And this because “whoever touches pitch will be defiled [by it]” (Sir. 13:1).

244. – Two rewards are promised to those who heed this admonition, namely, familiarity with God and adoption by God. Familiarity with God, because I will welcome you. As if to say: go out confidently, because I will welcome you as mine: “For my father and my mother have forsaken me, but the LORD will take me up” (Ps. 27:10); “Blessed is he whom thou dost choose and bring near, to dwell in your courts!” (Ps. 65:5); “Behold my servant, whom I uphold, my chosen, in whom my soul delights” (Is. 42:1). Divine adoption, because he adopts us as sons, because he says, I will be a father to you, and you shall be my sons and daughters: “For you did not receive the spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you have received the spirit of sonship” (Rom. 8:15). He says, sons, as to the perfect, and daughters, as to the imperfect; and this is taken from 2 Sam. (7:14), where it says of Solomon: “I will be his father, and he shall be my son.”
