# Chapter 13, Lecture 2

> 5 Examine yourselves, to see whether you are holding to your faith. Test yourselves. Do you not realize that Jesus Christ is in you?—unless indeed you fail to meet the test! 6 I hope you will find out that we have not failed. 7 But we pray God that you may not do wrong—not that we may appear to have met the test, but that you may do what is right, though we may seem to have failed. 8 For we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth. 9 For we are glad when we are weak and you are strong. What we pray for is your improvement. 10 I write this while I am away from you, in order that when I come I may not have to be severe in my use of the authority which the Lord has given me for building up and not for tearing down.

523. – After threatening God’s severe judgment, the Apostle warns them to be ready, so that they will not experience a severe judgment. First, he gives the admonition; secondly, he assigns the reason for it (v. 10). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he presents the admonition; secondly, he excludes a false suspicion (v. 7). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he advises them to examine themselves; secondly, he suggests what they will be able to find through such an examination (v. 5b).

524. – In regard to the first it should be noted that one who would appear in judgment securely should first examine himself on his deeds; in that way he can tell whether he will appear safely. Therefore the Apostle warns them that before they come to judgment, which will take place when he comes to them, they should examine themselves, saying: examine yourselves, i.e., examine and reflect on your acts: “Test everything; hold fast what is good” (1 Th. 5:21). He advises them to examine themselves on two points, namely, on faith; hence he says: to see whether you are holding to your faith, namely, which I have preached to you and you have received from me concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, or have fallen away and lapsed into another. This is necessary because in 1 Cor. (11:31) it says: “But if we judged ourselves truly, we should not be judged”; “Look at your way in the valley; know what you have done” (Jer. 2:23). Likewise all works, when he says: test yourselves, whether you be in good works, or whether your conscience bothers you for having done some evil. This is useful, because it says in 1 Cor. (2:28): “Let a man examine himself”; and in Gal. (6:4): “Let each one test his own work.”

525. – Then when he says, Do you not realize that Jesus Christ is in you? he shows what they can find through such an examination. First, what they might find in themselves; secondly, what they might find in the Apostle (v. 6).

526. – In themselves they will be able to discover two things by this examination, because they will either know that they are keeping the faith, and thus they will be able to find and know that Christ is in them; and this is what he says: Do you not realize that Jesus Christ is in you? i.e., if you were to examine yourselves, would you know that you have the faith and recognize that Christ is in you? As if to say: Yes, because where faith in Christ is, there Christ is: “That Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith” (Eph. 3:17); “Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, which you have from God?” (1 Cor. 6:19). Or they will know that they are not keeping the faith and will find themselves reprobates; hence he says, unless indeed you fail to meet the test! i.e., you will find that you have Christ, unless you have lost the faith and are fallen from the state of previously having had the faith: “You have rejected me, says the LORD, you keep going backward” (Jer. 15:6); “For the wicked are not removed. Refuse silver they are called” (Jer. 6:29).

527. – But here there is a literal question in regard to the statement: Do you not realize that Jesus Christ is in you? For Christ only remains in those who have charity, as it says in 1 Jn. (4:16): “God is love, and he who abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him” If therefore we know that Christ is in us by faith, it is required that this be by formed faith. But this is contrary to Ec. (9:1): “Their deeds are in the hand of God; whether it is love or hate man does not know.” I answer that “Christ dwelling in us” can be taken in two ways, namely, in regard to the intellect or in regard to the affections [affectum]. If it is taken in regard to the intellect, then he dwells in us by unformed faith; and in this way we know there is nothing to prevent our knowing with certainty that Christ dwells in us, namely, when we know that we hold the faith which the Catholic Church teaches and holds. But if it is taken in regard to the affectivity, then Christ dwells in us by formed faith; and in this way no one can know that Christ dwells in him, or that he has charity, unless this certainty be granted to a person by revelation and a special grace. But there is nothing to prevent us from having a conjecture [coniecturum] that we are in charity, namely, when a person finds himself so ready and disposed that he would not wish to do anything against Christ in any way for something temporal: “Beloved, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confidence before God” (1 Jn. 3:21). It is clear, therefore, that the Apostle is speaking in regard to the first way. Or he is even speaking of knowledge which is by a conjecture, as has been said. But his argument proceeds as to the second way and in regard to knowledge which is certain.

528. – What they might find in the Apostle is mentioned when he says, I hope you will find out that we have not failed. For since those Corinthians could say, “We are not reprobates, but we do not on that account hold to your teachings, because you are not right and should be repudiated.” Therefore he says, whatever the case may be with yourselves, I hope that from our life and doctrine, which we have disclosed to you, you will find out that we have not failed and have not taught evil or are excluded from the power we say we have: “A wise man, when you meet him, is known by his countenance” (Sir. 19:26, Vulgate); “You will know them by their fruits” (Matt. 7:16).

529. – Then when he says, But we pray God, he excludes the suspicion. For he had threatened them with a severe judgment when he mentioned his power to judge, and suggested an examination, trusting that Christ was in them, unless they were reprobate. Nevertheless he leaves in doubt the question whether Christ be in them. And because they might believe and suspect that the Apostle would rejoice in their being reprobates, in order to appear greater in comparison to them and to exercise a more severe judgment, the Apostle removes this suspicion here: first, with a prayer he directs to God on their behalf; secondly, by the joy he conceived in their regard (v. 9).

530. – He prays, therefore, that they may be found innocent and not be examined with the severity of a judgment; therefore he says, But we pray, namely to God, that you may not do wrong. As if to say: do not suppose that we desire you to be reprobates, but we pray that you may do no evil. He prays also that he may appear weak, thus excluding any desire on the part of the Apostle for excellence in comparison to them; hence he says, not that we may appear to have met the test, i.e., we do not pray that we may be commended as approved in comparison to you, but rather that you may do what is right [good]: “And let us not grow weary in well-doing” (Gal. 6:9); “Be strong, and let your heart take courage” (Ps. 27:14), though we may seem to have failed, by losing the power to punish and judge, because where there is no guilt, we are all equal and one does not have power over another to judge. Therefore, the Apostle rather wishes that they be good than be subject to the power of his judgment.

531. – That he would lack this power of judging, if they are good, is shown when he says: For we cannot do anything against the truth. As if to say: we do not labor for anything but the truth, and for it we stand. But it is obvious that if we were to punish the innocent, we would be standing against the truth and against justice. Hence, since the Apostle could not do anything against the truth, but for the truth and for justice, it is clear that he will not punish the innocent. It should be noted, according to Augustine in a Gloss [Lombard], that two things are necessary for avoiding sins, namely, free will and God’s grace. For if free will were not needed, neither precepts nor prohibitions nor exhortations would ever be given to men; further, punishments would be given in vain. But grace, too, is necessary, because unless God ruled all by his grace, a man could not stand; furthermore, it would be in vain to pray that he not lead us into temptation. Consequently, the Apostle, indicating that both are necessary, prays God to obtain grace, and advises that they withdraw from evil with their free will, and do good; hence he says, we pray, as to the first, that you may not do wrong, as to the second.

532. – Then when he says, For we are glad, he removes the false suspicion on account of the joy conceived over their good. First, he mentions the joy he conceives over their innocence; secondly, the prayer he utters for their perfection (v. 9b).

533. – He says therefore: we pray that you may appear approved, but we infirm; and this is clear from our emotion, because we rejoice that some among you are good and innocent, thus taking from us the power to judge and making us seem weak; and this is what he says: For we are glad when we are weak, i.e., not exercising our power, and you are strong, i.e., acting so well and overcoming vices that you take away our power to judge. For when a person does evil, he subjects himself to the power of a judge; but by acting well, he casts it away from him: “Would you have no fear of him who is in authority? Then do what is good, and you will receive his approval” (Rom. 13:3); “We are weak, but you are strong” (1 Cor. 4:10). Concerning that joy, it says in Phil. (2:17): “I am glad and rejoice with you all.”

534. – And not only do we rejoice in these things, but besides this what we pray for is your improvement. For in natural things we notice that each natural thing tends towards its own perfection, for which is had a natural desire; hence, to each thing is given the natural power to enable it to attain to its perfection. But God gives man grace, by which he may attain to his ultimate and perfect consummation, i.e., happiness, towards which he has a natural desire. Hence, when a person does not tend toward perfection, it is a sign that he does not have a sufficiency of God’s grace. Therefore, the Apostle, in order that they might grow in grace, prays that they be perfected: “And it is my prayer that your love may abound more and more, with knowledge and all discernment” (Phil. 1:9); “That you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand” (Eph. 6:13).

535. – Then, having given the admonition, he assigns the reason for it, saying, I write this while I am away from you, in order that when I come I may not have to be severe, i.e., I write these things to you in my absence to warn you, lest I be forced to do something against my will, which is that I may do nothing severe against you, except to the extent that I am compelled by you. Hence he says, that when I come among you I may not have to be more severe against you than I would wish or than you would wish: “For you admonished them and tried them as a father” (Wis. 11:11, Vulgate); “I who am humble when face to face with you, but bold to you when I am away!— I beg of you that when I am present I may not have to show boldness with such confidence as I count on showing against some” (2 Cor. 10:1). But because the Corinthians might say, “But supposing that we have acted well, would you be able to deal severely against us?” Therefore he answers, saying: No, because I neither plan nor am able to act except in my use of the authority which the Lord has given me. But God gave me this power, namely, of binding and loosing, for building up and not for tearing down, i.e., that you might be built up and not that you be destroyed. And if I were to correct you severely, I would not be building up but destroying: “Our authority, which the Lord gave for building you up and not for destroying you” (2 Cor. 10:8). But the Lord gave this power to Paul: “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them” (Ac. 13:2).
