# Chapter 12, Lecture 2

> 3 And I know that this man was caught up into Paradise—whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows— 4 and he heard things that cannot be told, which man may not utter. 5 On behalf of this man I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, except of my weaknesses. 6 Though if I wish to boast, I shall not be a fool, for I shall be speaking the truth. But I refrain from it, so that no one may think more of me than he sees in me or hears from me.

458. – Having spoken of the first rapture, the Apostle speaks of a second rapture. First, he mentions the rapture; secondly, its excellence (v. 4b).

459. – It should be noted that a Gloss says that this rapture was distinct from the first, and if one considers the matter well, two things are written of the Apostle to which these two raptures can be referred. For in Acts (chap. 9) it is recorded that he remained for three days without seeing and without taking food or drink; and the first rapture can be referred to this event, namely, that he was rapt to the third heaven at that time. But in Acts (chap. 22) it says that he was in a trance in the temple; hence the second rapture can refer to this. But this does not seem to be a similar case, because when he was in the trance, the Apostle had been cast into prison; but the Apostle wrote this epistle long before that. Therefore it must be said that this rapture differs from the first in regard to that into which he was rapt. For in the first rapture he had been rapt to the third heaven, but in the second to the paradise of God

460. – But if you take the third heaven in a corporeal sense according to the first acceptation of the heavens, as mentioned above, or if it was an imaginary vision, it could be called a bodily paradise, so that he was rapt to an earthly paradise. But this is against the author’s intention, according to whom we say that he was rapt to the third heaven, i.e., to a vision of intelligible things according to which they are seen in themselves and in their own natures, as has been said above. Hence, according to this we must not understand one thing by heaven and another by paradise, but one and the same thing by both, namely, the glory of the saints, but according to one thing in one case and according to another thing in the other case. For heaven suggests a certain loftiness accompanied by brightness, but paradise a certain joyful pleasantness. Now these two things are present in an excellent way in the saints and angels who see God, because there is present in them a most excellent brightness by which they see God, and a supreme agreeableness by which they enjoy God. Therefore, they are said to be in heaven as to the brightness and in paradise as to the pleasantness: “You shall see, and your heart shall rejoice” (Is. 66:14). Therefore, both of these were conferred on the Apostle, namely to be raised up to that most excellent clearness of knowledge, which he signifies when he says, to the third heaven, and to experience the agreeableness of the divine sweetness; hence he says, into paradise: “O how great is the multitude of thy sweetness, O Lord” (Ps. 31:20); “To him who conquers I will give some of the hidden manna” (Rev. 2:17). This sweetness is the delight experienced in enjoying God, and is mentioned in Matt. (25:13): “Enter into the joy of your master.” Thus the terminus of the rapture is clear, namely, into paradise, i.e., into that sweetness with which those who are in the heavenly Jerusalem are unceasingly refreshed.

461. – Then he mentions the excellence of that rapture, because he heard things that cannot be told, which man may not utter. This can be explained in two ways: in one way so that the word, “man,” is construed with “may” and “utter.” Then the sense is this: he heard secret words, i.e., he perceived an intimate understanding of God’s secret essence, as though by words, which words it is not lawful to be uttered by a man. In the other way, so that “man” is construed only with “may not”. Then the sense is this: he heard words, which it is not lawful to utter to a man, i.e., to an imperfect man.

462. – But it should be noted according to Augustine that Paul was rapt to a vision of the divine essence, which of course, cannot be seen by any created likeness. Hence, it is clear that what Paul saw of the divine essence cannot be described by any human tongue; otherwise, God would not be incomprehensible. Therefore, according to the first explanation it must be said: he heard, i.e., considered, secret words, i.e., the magnificence of the godhead, which no man can utter. He says “heard” for “saw” because that consideration was according to an interior act of the soul, in which the same is heard and seen, as it says in Num. (12:8): “For I speak to him mouth to mouth.” That consideration is called a vision, inasmuch as God is seen in it; and an utterance inasmuch as man in instructed about divine things in it.

463. – And because such spiritual things are not to be disclosed to the simple and imperfect, but to the perfect, as it says in 1 Cor. (2:6): “Yet among the mature we do impart wisdom,” it is explained in the second way, so that the secrets he heard there it is not lawful to man to utter, i.e., to the imperfect, but to the spiritual, among whom we speak wisdom: “It is the glory of God to conceal things” (Prov. 25:2), i.e., the fact that it is necessary to conceal the marvelous things of God pertains to God’s glory. The Psalm is according to the translation of Jerome: “Your praise, O God, is silent to you” (cf. Ps. 108:2, Vulgate), that is, cannot be comprehended by our words.

464. – Then when he says, On behalf of this man I will boast, he shows how he reacted to this glory. In regard to this he does three things. First, he shows that he did not glory in such revelations; secondly, he suggests that he has something else in which to glory (v. 6).

465. – In regard to the first it should be noted that the statement, on behalf of this man I will boast [glory], but on my own behalf I will not boast, can be read in two ways. In one way so that the Apostle is showing that he is the one in whom he glories, i.e., that he is the one who saw these visions. In another way, to show that it was someone else who saw these visions. For it should be noted that there are two things to consider in man, namely, the gift of God and the human condition. If a person glories in a gift of God as received from God, that glorying is good, as has been state above (10:17). But if he glories in that gift as though he had it of himself, then such glorying is evil: “What have you that you did not receive? If then you received it, why do you boast as if it were not a gift?” (1 Cor. 4:7). According to this, therefore, the Apostle says, on behalf of this man, namely, for the visions and gifts conferred on me by God, I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, i.e., will not glory in them as though I were their source, because I had them from God. But if I must glory, I will glory in nothing except my weaknesses, i.e., I have nothing in which I can glory save in my own condition.

466. – But if it is explained as showing that it was someone else who saw, even if it was he, then the sense is as though he were speaking of someone, saying, on behalf of this man I will boast, i.e., for the man who saw this and who received these gifts I will glory; but on my own behalf, as wishing to show that I am such a one, I will not boast except of my weaknesses, i.e., in the tribulations I suffer.

467. – But because they could say to him, “O Apostle, it is not strange that you do not glory, because you have nothing in which to glory,” he shows that even besides these visions he has something in which to glory. Although I might glory in such a man and not in myself, yet I can rightfully glory in myself, for if I should wish to boast either in such tribulations or in other things bestowed on me by God, or even for my infirmity, I shall not be a fool, i.e., I will not act foolishly. Why? For I will be speaking the truth about the other things in which I can glory besides those visions. He says, I shall not be a fool, because he gloried in the things he had; for when a person glories in things he does not have, he is speaking foolishly: “For you say, I am rich, I have prospered, and I need nothing; not knowing that you are wretched, pitiable, poor, blind, and naked” (Rev. 3:17); and because he gloried with sufficient reason, as is clear from the foregoing.

468. – Then when he says, But I refrain from it, he indicates the reason he does not glory in everything, if he can glory, the reason being that he wishes to spare them. Hence he says, I refrain from it, so that no one may think more of me than he sees in me or hears from me. As if to say: I could glory in many other things, but I forbear, i.e., I glory sparingly, of I forbear commending myself, lest I become burdensome to you. For God has conferred on me such things that if you knew them, you would regard me as much greater; and these are the many charismatic gifts which the Apostle had and for which the men of this world are wont to commend others and regard them as great more than for doing something pleasing. Hence he says, I do not wish to be commended on these gifts; therefore I refrain, i.e., I do not glory. Why? So that no one may think more of me than what he sees in me or hears from me.

469. – Or another way: man is known in two ways: by his manner of life and by his doctrine. Although he could have done so, the Apostle did not wish to say about himself certain things which went beyond his life and doctrine. Consequently, I refrain, so that no one may think more of me than he sees in me, i.e., in my outward conduct, or hears from me, i.e., from the doctrine of my preaching and exhortation and instruction, because they might perhaps think him immortal or an angel: “A man of understanding remains silent” (Prov. 11:12): “A fool gives full vent to his anger, but a wise man quietly holds it back” (Prov. 29:11).

470. – Or he says: But I refrain, on account of his detractors, namely, the false apostles, who said that he glories from elation without cause or for things that were not in him. Therefore, he says, But I refrain, i.e., I glory sparingly, so that no one, i.e., the false apostles, think of me as having an excessive spirit of elation, more than that which he sees in me or has heard from me, i.e., above the power of my merits: “O LORD, my heart is not lifted up, my eyes are not raised too high” (Ps. 131:1); “The greater you are, the more humble yourself in all things” (Sir. 3:10, Vulgate).
