# Chapter 11, Lecture 2

> 4 For if some one comes and preaches another Jesus than the one we preached, or if you receive a different spirit from the one you received, or if you accept a different gospel from the one you accepted, you submit to it readily enough. 5 I think that I am not in the least inferior to these superlative apostles. 6 Even if I am unskilled in speaking, I am not in knowledge; in every way we have made this plain to you in all things. 7 Did I commit a sin in abasing myself so that you might be exalted, because I preached God’s gospel without cost to you? 8 I robbed other churches by accepting support from them in order to serve you.

380. – Having described the zeal he had for the Corinthians and proved it reasonable, the Apostle now rejects their excuse. In regard to this he does two things. First, he proposes their excuse; secondly, he removes it (v. 5)

381. – In regard to the first it should be noted that the Corinthians might suppose that he has zeal for them, because he feared that they might set aside his teaching on account of the false apostles’ teaching; hence they could say: it is obvious that lesser goods should be discarded in favor of greater goods. Therefore, if the false apostles teach better doctrines, you should not be disturbed if we acquiesce in them. Hence, he proposes this excuse by showing that no one is better than the Apostle in teaching and preaching.

382. – For the Apostle preached and taught three things. First, that they were Christ’s: “For what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord” (2 Cor. 4:5); secondly, that they have the Spirit of Christ: “Any one who does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him” (Rom. 8:9); thirdly, that they received the Gospel of Christ: “For I am not ashamed of the gospel: it is the power of God for salvation to every one who has faith, to the Jew first and also to the Greek” (Rom. 1:16). If, therefore, the false apostles preach and teach something better to you, you would do right and would be excusable; but they do not do this. And this is what he says: For if some one comes and preaches another Jesus than the one we preached, or if you receive a different spirit from the one you received, or if you accept a different gospel from the one you accepted, you submit to it readily enough. As if to say: I fear that a false apostle might come to you unsent, but of himself, as a thief and a robber: “All who came before me are thieves and robber” (Jn. 10:8); “I did not send the prophets, yet they ran” (Jer. 25:21); “And how can men preach unless they are sent?” (Rom. 10:15). If, I say, such a preacher preaches to you another Christ, namely, more excellent than the one we have preached, which cannot be, because as it says in 1 Cor. (8:6): “And one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and through whom we exist”; and this as to the first. Or if you receive a different spirit from the one you received, namely, better than the one you have received from us, i.e., by our ministry, which cannot be, because as it says in 1 Cor. (12:11): “All these are inspired by one and the same Spirit, who apportions to each one individually as he wills”; and this as to the second. Or if you accept a different gospel, i.e., another preaching or doctrine, from the one you accepted from us: “I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting him who called you in the grace of Christ and turning to a different gospel” (Gal. 1:6). If, I say, they did other and better things for you, you submit to it readily enough, i.e., you would be right in excusing yourselves. But because another, i.e., better Gospel cannot be delivered to them, the Apostle excommunicates the Galatians, if they receive another Gospel: “If any one is preaching to you a gospel contrary to that which you received, let him be accursed” (Gal. 1:9).

383. – Then when he says, I think that I am not in the least inferior, he removes this excuse. In regard to this he does two things. First, he shows that he did not do less for them than the others; secondly, that he did more (v. 7). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he shows that he did nothing less in deed than the other apostles; secondly, he suggests that he was not lacking the means to do this (v. 6); thirdly, he presents the evidence for both (v. 6b).

384. – He says therefore: you would be right in allowing yourselves to be seduced by them, if they preached something better to you; but this is not true. For, i.e., because I think that I am not in the least inferior to these superlative apostles, i.e., than Peter and John, whom they considered great. He compares himself to the great apostles, both because Paul seemed to them and was regarded by them as less than they, on the ground that they had been with Christ, and Paul not; and because the false apostles claimed to have been sent by them. Therefore, by showing himself equal to the great apostles, he removes their error and refutes the false apostles: “I worked harder than any of them” (1 Cor. 15:10).

385. – But lest perhaps they should say to him: whence did you obtain the faculty to do this, since you are unskilled in our speech? He shows that the faculty is due to the vastness of his knowledge, saying, even if I am unskilled in speaking, I am not in knowledge: “So also our beloved brother Paul wrote to you according to the wisdom given him” (2 Pet. 3:15). But this should be noted, namely, that the false apostles, seeking their own glory and pursuing gain, tried to attract people by ornate and subtle and exquisite words, trying only to stroke their ears gently. But the Apostle, because he was not seeking his own advantage but only the spread and growth of the faith, proposed the word of faith in such a way that all could understand, adjusting himself to the condition and capacity of his hearers. Hence, because they were not capable of lofty doctrine in the beginning, he proposed the faith to them not in subtle terms but in a way they could understand, namely, plainly and clearly. That is why they said he was rude in speech: “Not with eloquent wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power” (1 Cor. 1:17). On this account the Apostle says: although I be rude in speech, as it seems to you, this was not due to a lack of knowledge but for your sake by way of dispensing it, because I “could not address you as spiritual men, but as men of the flesh, as babes in Christ” (1 Cor. 3:1) Or according to the letter, it must be said that the Apostle stuttered, and on this account the false apostles ridiculed him. Therefore he says: for even if I am unskilled in speaking, i.e., have a speech impediment, I am not in knowledge: “I am slow of speech and of tongue” Ex. 4:10).

386. – But the fact that I did no less than the great apostles is evident from the things I have done for you; hence, he says: in every way we have made this plain to you in all things, who have experienced what I have done: “You are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord” (1 Cor. 9:2); “The signs of a true apostle were performed among you in all patience, with signs and wonders and mighty works” (2 Cor. 12:12).

387. – Then when he says, Did I commit a sin, he shows that he has done more than all the others; and this because he preached without payment. In regard to this he does two things. First, he states the fact; secondly, he assigns the reason of the fact (v. 11). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he shows the fact as to the past; secondly, as to the future (v. 9b). He shows the past fact in two ways: first in general, and second in particular (v. 7b).

388. – He says therefore: I am correct in saying that I have done no less than the others, unless you think I did less and acted wrongly, because I lessened my authority in not accepting payments from you. But if this were so, I would have done evil. Therefore he shows that it is not evil, and this is what he says: Did I commit a sin in abasing myself and lessening my authority? As if to say: No: “The greater you are, humble yourself in all things, and you will find grace in the sight of God” (Sir. 3:20, Vulgate); “For though I am free from all men, I have made myself a slave to all, that I might win the more” (1 Cor. 9:19); “Whoever humbles himself like this child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven” (Matt. 18:4). The reason for humbling myself is not for my own gain but for your improvement; hence he says: so that you might be exalted, i.e., be strengthened in faith. But the Corinthians were very covetous, and if he had accepted payment from the very beginning, they might perhaps have left the faith. Likewise, the false prophets preached for monetary profit. Therefore, in order that the Corinthians receive the Apostle, and the false prophets remove the occasion for profit, the Apostle preached for free and without subsidy.

389. – Then he explains in detail what he had said in general. In regard to this he does two things. First, he shows how he preached to them without charge during his first visit with them; secondly, he shows that he did the same during the long stay he made with them (v. 9).

390. – In regard to the first he does two things. First, he mentions the humiliation, saying: in this did I humble myself, because I preached God’s gospel without cost to you, i.e., without charge; but not for a reward, because this is not praiseworthy. For although all could take personal payments from those to whom they preached the word of God, yet no one should preach for the reward or the payment.

391. – Secondly, because they could say: where did you obtain your support? He answers that it came from the other churches, saying: I robbed other churches by accepting support from them in order to serve you. By this he convinces them that they could not say to the Apostle that it is unlawful for him to take from them. For if it is taken from others for serving them, it is much more lawful for him to take from them. From this it is apparent that a papal legate visiting one part of his jurisdiction can accept stipends, and that the Pope can take subsidies from various parts of the world to relieve the needs of some country. The reason is that the Church is as one body. But we see in a natural body that, when strength is failing in one member, nature administers humors and strength by taking from other members.
