# Chapter 10, Lecture 1

> 1 I, Paul, myself entreat you, by the meekness and gentleness of Christ—I who am humble when face to face with you, but bold to you when I am away!— 2 I beg of you that when I am present I may not have to show boldness with such confidence as I count on showing against some who suspect us of acting in worldly fashion. 3 For though we live in the world we are not carrying on a worldly war, 4 for the weapons of our warfare are not worldly but have divine power to destroy strongholds. 5 We destroy arguments and every proud obstacle to the knowledge of God, and take every thought captive to obey Christ, 6 being ready to punish every disobedience, when your obedience is complete.

343. – After dealing with the good ministers of Christ and of the faith, the Apostle now attacks false ministers and false apostles. First, he attacks these; secondly, those who, being deceived by them, have adhered to them (chap. 13). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he gives the reason, excusing himself from the task imposed on him; secondly, he gives the evidence for the fact (v. 7). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he refuses to make a test; secondly, he excuses himself with a reason (v. 2b). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he entreats them; secondly, he interjects what is imposed on them by the false apostles (v. 1b); thirdly, he refuses the test (v. 2).

344. – He says therefore: I, Paul, myself, who am urging you and others to give alms; I myself, I say, entreat you, by the meekness and gentleness of Christ. Of the mildness of Christ, Matt. (11:29) has: “Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls”; of his modesty, Wis. (11:21) has: “For it is always in your power to show great strength, and who can withstand the might of your arm?” For modesty consists in nothing less than observing the measure in acting. But he makes special mention of Christ’s mildness and modesty, because the false apostles and the Corinthians accused Paul of acting humbly when he was among them, but when he was absent he wrote very harshly. Therefore, he mentioned those two qualities of Christ to show that the Apostle also has them and observes them after the example of Christ.

345. – Hence, he introduces the vice ascribed to him, saying, I, Paul, myself, i.e., truly humble, because Paul means humble and quiet: “For I am the least of the apostles” (1 Cor. 15:9); hence, “I myself”, i.e., truly Paul: “But thou art the same” (Ps. 102:27); “There is one that humbles himself wickedly, and his interior is full of deceit” (Sir. 19:23); “For where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there will be disorder and every vile practice” (Jas. 3:16). I, I say, entreat you, who when face to face with you, i.e., outwardly, as you say, am humble among you, acting humbly while I am present with you, but when I am away, namely, when there is no fear of being injured by any of you, am bold toward you, i.e., act boldly, writing harsh epistles to you: “But the righteous are bold as a lion” (Prov. 28:1).

346. – Then when he says, I beg of you, he refuses to make a test. For they believed that the Apostle acted humbly among them because of fear; hence, he says: you believe so, but I beg of you—since you would like to experience whether I, if it were necessary, would do when I am present as I do in my absence. And so he says: I may not have to show boldness when I am present, i.e., when I am among you, to do anything, if it is necessary, with such confidence as I count on showing, i.e., as confidently as I am thought by you to be bold, i.e., to act boldly and confidently against some uncorrected persons, by rebuking and correcting through letters: “He exults in his strength” (Job 39:20).

347. – Then he excuses himself with a reason, saying: who suspect us of acting in worldly fashion. As if to say: although I am not willing to justify myself for your sake with a test, nevertheless, there is a reason at hand to justify me. In regard to this he does three things. First, he gives the reason why they lay this charge against him; secondly, he destroys the reason (v. 3); thirdly, he confirms it with a reason (v. 4).

348. – The reason why this charge is laid to him, namely that he is humble when present but harsh and severe when absent, is that they consider that the Apostle acts in a worldly manner, i.e., walks according to the flesh. And because every person works according to what rules the work, and the end should be the rule, it follows that everyone directs his own work to the end he intends. Therefore, those who place their end in carnal goods are said to walk according to the flesh. And because these things can be taken from them, men who tend to carnal things behave gently and humbly toward others. Therefore, because they believed that the Apostle walked according to the flesh, they supposed that this was the reason he behaved humbly among them.

349. – But this reason is null and void; therefore, he destroys it, saying: For though we live in the world we are not carrying on a worldly war [according to the flesh]. As if to say: we cannot deny that we are in the flesh, because in Rom. (8:12) he says: “So then, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh,” but that we are ruled according to the flesh, by placing our end or our intention in carnal goods, this is false, because we are not carrying on a worldly war, i.e., we do not regulate our life, which is a warfare (Job 7:1) according to the flesh.

350. – That we are not carrying on a worldly war he proves when he says, for the weapons of our warfare are not worldly [carnal]; and first of all, from the weapons of warfare, as a fighter has weapons suitable to his warfare. Now it is plain that the weapons of those who fight according to the flesh, or wage war, are riches, pleasures, and worldly and temporal honors and power. But since our weapons are not of this sort, for the weapons of our warfare are not worldly, but have divine power [are mighty to God], i.e., according to God or to the honor of God, therefore, we do not war according to the flesh.

351. – But secondly, when he says, but have divine power to destroy strongholds, he indicates the power of spiritual armor, which is evident from its threefold effect. The first effect is that rebellious persons are put to shame by those arms; in regard to this he says, to destroy strongholds. As if to say: the power of God is quite capable of destroying the rebellious: “That he may be able to give instruction in sound doctrine and also to confute those who contradict it” (Titus 1:9); “See, I have set you this day over nations and over kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down, to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant” (Jer. 1:10). Men fortify themselves against God in two ways: some with astute plans, such as tyrants, who plot with their evil designs to destroy the things of God, that they may exercise their tyranny; as to this he says, we destroy arguments [counsels], namely, of tyrants: “He takes the wise in their own craftiness” (Job 5:13). But others through pride or profundity of their own talent; as to this he says, and every proud obstacle [height], namely, of their pride: “Do not be haughty” (Rom. 12:16), i.e., proud things, or by profundity of intellect, both of lawyers and philosophers: “Neither height nor depth” (Rom. 8:39); “Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes” (Is. 5:21). Every proud obstacle to the knowledge of God, i.e., the faith, which is knowledge of God, because they attack things said about God, namely, the virgin birth and other of God’s marvels: “For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord” (Is. 11:9); “Who have not learned what some call the deep things of Satan” (Rev. 2:24); “So do not become proud, but stand in awe” (Rom. 11:20).

352. – The second effect is the conversion of unbelievers to the faith; as to this he says, and take every thought captive to obey Christ. This happens when a man submits all he knows to the ministry of the Christ and of the faith: “To bind their kings with chains and their nobles with fetters of iron” (Ps. 149:8); “Put your feet into her fetters, and your neck into her chains” (Sir. 6:25), i.e., into the teaching of the faith.

353. – The third effect is the correction of sinners; as to this he says, being ready to punish every disobedience, i.e., having the readiness and free will to punish all disobedience: “And two-edged swords in their hands” (Ps. 149:6). This will occur when your obedience is complete, i.e., when you are perfectly obedient, because if you are willing to obey, there will be no reason for punishing the disobedience of others and your own. Or we shall take revenge on disobedience, when your obedience is complete, i.e., when your disobedience shall be destroyed; for contraries are cured by contraries.
