# Chapter 5, Lecture 1

> 1 For we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2 Here indeed we groan, and long to put on our heavenly dwelling, 3 so that by putting it on we may not be found naked. 4 For while we are still in this tent, we sigh with anxiety; not that we would be unclothed, but that we would be further clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.

152. – After commending the ministry of the New Testament, both as to its dignity and its use, the Apostle now commends it as to its reward. For although he had already said something about the reward, it was partial and incomplete; so now he deals with it at greater length. In regard to this he does three things: first, he treats of the reward; secondly, of the preparation for and reception of the reward (v. 9); thirdly, the cause of each, namely, of the preparation and of the reward that is expected (v. 18). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he mentions the reward expected; secondly, he expresses a desire for the expected reward (v. 2)

153. – Since the awaited reward is inestimable, namely, of heavenly glory, he says, For we know. As if to say according to a Gloss [Lombard]: indeed he works in us a weight of glory, because this glory will be not only in our souls, but in our bodies. For, i.e., because we know, i.e., are certain, because we already have it in hope, that if our earthly tent, i.e., the body. For as has been said, man is called a mind, since that is the most important thing in man. Now this mind is to the body as a man is to a house. For just as the man living in a house is not destroyed, when the house is destroyed, but he continues to exist, so when the body is destroyed, the mind, i.e., the rational soul, is not destroyed, but continues to exist. The body, therefore, is called the earthly tent we live in: “Those who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed before the moth” (Job 4:19). Is Destroyed, i.e., dissolved. We know, I say, we have a building from God, i.e., prepared by God; a building, I say, a house not made with hands, i.e., not a work of man or of nature, but an incorruptible body, which we shall assume. It is not made with hands, because incorruptibility in our bodies is the result of a divine action alone: “He will change our lowly body to be like his glorious body” (Phil. 3:21). Eternal in the heavens, i.e., a house prepared for us from all eternity: “A tabernacle that shall never be destroyed in heaven” (Is. 33:20, Vulgate); “Your reward shall be great in heaven” (Matt. 5:12). This exchange, namely, to get a heavenly home for an earthly one, is what Job desired: “All the days of my service I would wait, till my release should come” (Job 14:14).

154. – The explanation is based on a Gloss, but it does not agree with the Apostle’s meaning, nor with what preceded and what follows. For when he is dealing with one continuous subject, he does not interject another. Therefore, let us see what the Apostle really means, for he wants to show that the saints are reasonable in enduring the tribulations by which the present life is destroyed, because this results in obtaining glory at once, and not a glorified body, as the Gloss says. Therefore he says: the reason we endure these things is that we know, i.e., we hold it as certain, that if the earthly tent we live in, i.e., the body, is destroyed, i.e., corrupted by death, we have at once, not in hope but in reality, a better house, namely, a building, a house not made with hands, i.e., heavenly glory, not a glorified body. Of this house it says in John (14:2): “In my Father’s house are many rooms.” This house is from God, not made with hands, because eternal glory is God himself: “Be a rock of refuge for me, a strong fortress to save me” (Ps. 31:2), and eternal in the literal sense, because it is the eternal God. In the heavens, i.e., on high, because as soon as the body is dead, the holy soul obtains this glory, not in hope but in reality. For thus even before the body is dissolved, we have this home in hope.

155. – Thus, the reward of the saints is wonderful and desirable, because it is heavenly glory. Hence, he links the desire of the saints with this reward, saying: Here indeed we groan, and long to put on our heavenly dwelling. Here he does three things. First, he expresses the desire of grace for its reward; secondly, he shows that the desire of grace is retarded by the desire of nature (v. 4); thirdly, he shows that the desire of grace overcomes the desire of nature (v. 6).

156. – The desire of grace is fervent: Here indeed we groan, and long to put on our heavenly dwelling. As if to say: this is the real proof that we have a house not made with hands, because if the desire of nature is not in vain, much less is the desire of grace in vain. Therefore, since we have a most fervent desire of grace for heavenly glory, it is impossible for it to be in vain; and this is what he says, we groan, i.e., groaning we desire, namely with our soul’s desire that we are delayed: “Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech” (Ps. 120:5). We groan, I say, and long to put on our dwelling, i.e., the enjoyment of glory, which is from heaven, i.e., heavenly. It is called a dwelling because the saints dwell in that glory as their place of consolation: “Enter into the joy of the Lord” (Matt. 25:21). In saying, to put on, he is stating that the heavenly home of which he spoke above is not something separated from man, but something inhering in him. For a man is not said to put on a house, but clothes, but he inhabits a house. In this way he shows that the desire is for something that inheres, because it is put on, and something which contains and exceeds because it is inhabited.

157. – But because he did not merely say, “put on” (indui), but “put on over” (superindui), he gives the reason for this, when he says, so that by putting it on we may not be found naked. As if to say: if the soul were to put on a heavenly dwelling, in such a way that the earthly dwelling were not taken off, i.e., in such a way that our body were not dissolved by death, the attainment of that heavenly dwelling would be “to be put on over”. But because it is necessary to be divested of that earthly dwelling, if the heavenly is to be put on, it cannot be a “putting on over”, but simply a “putting on.” Hence he says, so that by putting it on we may not be found naked. As if to say: we would indeed be putting on over, if we were found clothed and not naked. For a naked person is not said to be clothed over, but to be clothed. But a Gloss [Lombard] explains it as a spiritual dress, saying: “We desire to be clothed over, and this will indeed be done, but under this condition, that we be found clothed, namely, with the virtues, and not naked, namely, of the virtues.” Of this clothing it says in Colossians (3:12): “Put on then, as God’s chosen ones, holy and beloved, compassion, kindness, lowliness, meekness, and patience.” As if to say: no one will attain to this glory, unless he has the virtues. But this explanation does not seem to agree with the Apostle’s intention.

158. – Thus, therefore, the desire of grace burns for a reward, but it is retarded by the desire of nature. He shows this when he says: For while we are still in this tent, we sigh with anxiety. Herein, therefore, he first shows the condition of the natural desire; secondly, he shows that even this condition of the natural desire is from God (v. 5).

159. – The condition of the desire is natural, delaying the desire of grace, because we would prefer to be found clothed and not naked, i.e., we would prefer that the soul attain to glory without the body’s being dissolved by death. The reason for this is that there is a natural desire in the soul to be united to the body; otherwise, death would not be a punishment. And this is what he says: For while we are still in this tent, i.e., who live in this mortal body: “Since I know that the putting off of my body (tent) will be soon” (2 Pet. 1:14), we sigh, i.e., inwardly in the heart, and not outwardly with our voice: “We moan and moan like doves” (Is. 59:11), because it is hard to think of death, and yet burdened as with something against our desire, in that we cannot attain to glory without the putting off of the body. This is so much against our natural desire that, as Augustine says, not even old age itself could remove the fear of death from Peter. And so he says, not that we would be unclothed, namely, of our earthly tent, but that we would be further clothed with super-heavenly glory, or, according to a Gloss, with a glorified body. But because it could seem unbecoming that the body, on the one hand should be corruptible of its very nature, if it had not been dissolved before, and, on the other hand, glorified, he mentions the way in which he would like this to happen, saying, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. As if to say: we do not desire to be clothed over in such a way that the body remains mortal, but so that the glory take away corruption altogether from the body without its dissolution. Hence he says, so that what is mortal, i.e., the very corruption of the body, may be swallowed up by life, i.e., glory: “Death is swallowed up in victory” (1 Cor. 15:54).
