# Chapter 7, Lecture 1

1 Since we have these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of body and spirit, and make holiness perfect in the fear of God. 2 Open your hearts to us; we have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one. 3 I do not say this to condemn you, for I said before that you are in our hearts, to die together and to live together.

245. – Having informed the Corinthians how to behave in the future, the Apostle now commends them on the good they have accomplished in the past. But in order to connect the past with the future, he first concludes his admonition; secondly, he commends them (v. 4). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he gives the admonition; secondly, he gives himself as an example to have the admonition obeyed (v. 2); thirdly, he states his intention in admonishing them (v. 3).

246. – In regard to the first he does three things. First, he gives them a motive for observing the admonition, and this is a promise made to them. Hence, he says, Since we have these promises, beloved, namely, that God may dwell in you, and that you may receive us.

247. – Secondly, he gives the admonition, when he says, let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of body and spirit, because those promises are given only to those who are clean; and so let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of body and spirit, i.e., of carnal and spiritual vices: “Purify yourselves, you who bear the vessels of the Lord” (Is. 52:11). Here it should be noted that every sin which is consummated in carnal delight is carnal, while that which is consummated in spiritual delight is spiritual. That is why carnal sins, if they are considered in their consummation, are two in number, namely, gluttony and lust; but the others are spiritual sins. But if they are considered in their origin, then all sins can be considered carnal, because all of them have their origin in a conception of the flesh. In this sense he speaks to the Galatians (5:19): “Now the works of the flesh are plain: fornication, impurity, licentiousness, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, anger, selfishness, dissension, party spirit, envy, drunkenness, carousing, and the like.”

248. – Thirdly, he mentions how they can fulfil the admonition when he says, making holiness perfect in the fear of God. For someone could say: were we not cleansed in baptism? That is why he added, making holiness perfect, i.e., let us perfect the original cleansing in baptism. For the same is holy that is clean: “Be holy, for I am holy” (Lev. 11:44). Let us perfect, I say, because philosophers have tried to be perfect and have failed, because they were unable to avoid sins. For no matter how many other sins they avoided or how well they exercised the acts of the virtues, the sin of unbelief remained in them. Consequently, cleanness is made perfect only in the true worship of God. And this is what he says: in the fear, i.e., in the worship, of God: “The fear of God has set itself over all things” (Sir. 25:14, Vulgate). But this seems contrary to Col. (3:14): “And above all these put on love, which binds everything together in perfect harmony.” Therefore, sanctification is not perfected in the fear of God, but in the love of God. I answer that he is speaking here of filial fear, which is the effect of charity, and not of servile fear, which is contrary to charity. He says, in the fear, to teach us to love God with a certain reverence and carefulness. For love causes security, which sometimes begets negligence; but one who fears is always careful.

249. – Then when he says, open your hearts to us, he offers himself as an example. As if to say: take us as an example: “Be imitators of me as I am of Christ” (1 Cor. 11:1). For I have guarded myself against uncleanness by holiness, because I have injured no one. Here it should be noted that a person might injure his neighbor in three ways, but Paul did not injure them in any of these ways. First, in his person, as to this he says, we have wronged no one, namely in his person, as wicked masters do: “Who tear the skin from off my people” (Mic. 3:2). Secondly, in their reputation by inducing them to evil by example and persuasion; as to this he says, we have corrupted no one: “Bad company ruins good morals” (1 Cor. 15:33). Thirdly, by stealing their goods; as to this he says, we have taken advantage of no one: “That no man transgress and wrong his brother in this matter” (1 Th. 4:6).

250. – Then when he says, I do not say this to condemn you, he discloses his intention. As if to say: I do not say this to condemn you, but to correct you. For past evils are wont to be recalled sometimes for condemnation, when there is no further hope of correction; and sometimes for amendment, so that they will be corrected. And this is the way he speaks here: I do not say this to condemn you: “I say this for your own benefit” (1 Cor. 7:35). The reason for this is because I rejoice in your good: for I said before that you are in our hearts: “You yourselves are our letter of recommendation, written on your hearts, to be known and read by all men” (2 Cor. 3:2); “It is right for me to feel thus about you all, because I hold you in my heart, for you are all partakers with me of grace, both in my imprisonment and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel” (Phil. 1:7). You are, I say, in our hearts, namely, to die together and to live together. This can be understood of the death of guilt and of natural death. Of the death of guilt, not that we are prepared to die with you, i.e., not that when you sin, we want to sin, but we take your death of guilt with as much pain as our own: “Who is weak, and I am not weak?” (2 Cor. 11:29); “I die everyday” (1 Cor. 15:31). And to live together, because I take as much joy in your good life in grace as in my own. Of natural death: then to die together it taken to mean that I am prepared to die for you: “I will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls” (2 Cor. 12:15); to live together, i.e., I desire you to be companions in eternal life: “If we have died with him, we shall also live with him” (2 Tim. 2:11).
