# Chapter 7, Lecture 4

12 So although I wrote to you, it was not on account of the one who did the wrong, nor on account of the one who suffered the wrong, but in order that your zeal for us might be revealed to you in the sight of God. 13 Therefore we are comforted. And besides our own comfort we rejoiced still more at the joy of Titus, because his mind has been set at rest by you all. 14 For if I have expressed to him some pride in you, I was not put to shame; but just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting before Titus has proved true. 15 And his heart goes out all the more to you, as he remembers the obedience of you all, and the fear and trembling with which you received him. 16 I rejoice, because I have perfect confidence in you.

273. – Here the Apostle assigns the reason why he rejoices over them; then he draws his conclusion, in which he does two things. First, he discloses the intention he had in writing; secondly, he reveals the joy he had over their amendment (v. 13).

274. – He says therefore: from the fact that you are undefiled, it is apparent that although I wrote to you to rebuke you in my epistle, it was not only on account of the one who did the wrong by staining his father’s chamber with incest, as it says in 1 Cor. (chap. 5), nor on account of the one alone who suffered the wrong, namely, on account of the father, as if not on account of the zeal for revenge only, but I did this that our solicitude might be revealed, which we have for you, i.e., that you might know how careful we are for you. And I say this in the sight of God, as an oath with God as witness: “For I want you to know how greatly I strive for you” (Col. 2:1). Or another way: I have not written to you only for the sake of him that did the wrong, that he might be corrected, or for him that suffered it, that he might be placated, but that our solicitude for you might be revealed, namely, to you who were indignant for the insult and for the punishment inflicted on the fornicator: be reconciled to God.

275. – Then he concludes to the joy he had at their correction when he says, therefore we were comforted. As if to say: because I obtained this from writing to you, namely, that you are corrected, therefore, we were comforted, i.e., we took comfort. For a man is joyful when he obtains what he desired and intended: “But by the grace of God” (2 Cor. 1:12).

276. – Then when he says, and besides our own comfort, he states the second cause of his comfort, which is taken from the devotion they showed to Titus. In regard to this he does three things. First, he mentions the joy he felt at Titus’ joy; secondly, the reason for the joy (v. 14); thirdly, the matter over which Titus rejoiced (v. 15).

277. – He says, therefore: we did rejoice at your amendment, and besides our own comfort, we rejoiced still more than we were disturbed by the tribulation, at the joy of Titus: and this because his mind has been set at rest by you all. For a prelate’s spirit is refreshed when his subjects are obedient to him and revere him: “Refresh my heart in Christ” (Phlm. 20). Set at rest, I say, by you all, because all are either amended or there is a hope of amendment.

278. – He assigns the reason for this joy from two aspects: one is on the part of the Apostle, namely, because he was found to be truthful. For the Apostle had commended the Corinthians to Titus before he went to them. But now, because Titus found them to be just as the Apostle had said, he rejoiced that his words were true. And this is what he says, for if I have expressed to him some pride in you, by commending you, I was not put to shame, i.e., I do not blush as having said something false. For when a person is found to be a liar, he is ashamed: “A man skilled in words may be hated” (Sir. 37:20). But just as everything we said to you was true, i.e., as I have preached the truth to you, so our boasting before Titus has proved true. The other reason is on the part of the Corinthians. For friends desire that those whom they love be loved by everyone. Therefore, because Titus loved the Corinthians for their devotion, the Apostle rejoices over this and says, and his heart goes out all the more to you. As if to say: I not only rejoice because I was found to be right, but also because his heart, i.e., his charity and great love, goes out all the more to you than before, because he has seen your progress; or, more abundantly than towards others: “Put on then, as God’s chosen ones, holy and beloved, compassion, kindness, lowliness, meekness, and patience” (Col. 3:12).

279. – He discloses that the matters over which he rejoiced were their obedience and reverence: obedience, when he says, as he remembers the obedience of you all; for this also he praised you: “To obey is better than sacrifice” (1 Sam. 15:22); “Listen to me, your father, O children” (Sir. 3:1). But their reverence when he says, and the fear, namely, filial and not servile, with fear of soul and trembling of body with which you received him: “For I bear you witness that, if possible, you would have plucked out your eyes and given them to me” (Gal. 4:15). And because you acted that way toward him, I rejoiced, for I was found to be right and he loves you. Hence, I rejoice, because I have perfect confidence in you, not only in good will, but also in good works, that you will act well in the future: “In your case, beloved, we feel sure of better things that belong to salvation” (Heb. 6:9).
