# Chapter 114

16 I repeat, let no one think me foolish; but even if you do, accept me as a fool, so that I too may boast a little. 17 (What I am saying I say not with the Lord’s authority but as a fool, in this boastful confidence; 18 since many boast of worldly things, I too will boast.) 19 For you gladly bear with fools, being wise yourselves! 20 For you bear it if a man makes slaves of you, or preys upon you, or takes advantage of you, or puts on airs, or strikes you in the face. 21 To my shame, I must say, we were too weak for that!

409. – Having asked the Corinthians to bear patiently with his commendation, and shown that he did this out of the zeal he had for them because that zeal was reasonable and ordinate, the Apostle now presents another reason through which he shows that, given he is acting foolishly, they should nevertheless, put up with him. Hence, in this reason he proceeds on the supposition that he is foolish. In this part he does two things. First he makes his request; secondly, he gives the reason for what he said (v. 17).

410. – In his request he does two things. First, he asks that they not consider him foolish, which pertains to the previous reason; hence he says, I repeat it, since my zeal is reasonable and I am acting reasonably in commending myself, let no one think me foolish. Secondly, he asks that, granted that he is acting foolishly, they should nevertheless put up with him, which pertains to the present reason. Therefore he says, but even if you do, i.e., if I am not reasonable in commending myself and on that account you want to regard me as foolish, nevertheless, accept, i.e., bear with me as a fool. He says, as, because although they may regard him as foolish, in this matter he is not really foolish. Accept me, I say, as a fool so that I too may boast a little. He says, a little, because further on he will commend himself on the glory which is according to the flesh, which is very little: “Man, who is a maggot, and the son of man, who is a worm!” (Job 25:6); “How can he who is dust and ashes be proud?” (Sir. 10:9).

411. – Then when he says, What I am saying, he assigns the reason for what he had said. But he had said three things, for which he wishes to give a reason. First, for the fact that he supposed it was foolish to commend himself; secondly, why he wishes to glory (v. 18); thirdly, that they should bear with him (v. 19).

412. – He says therefore: the reason why you should take me who am foolish is because what I am saying in this boastful confidence, i.e., in this commendation according to the flesh, which is desired by some, as if they ought to subsist by it, I say not with the Lord’s authority, but as a fool. He speaks hypothetically, as if to say: if I were not reasonable in commending myself, then what I am saying for my commendation would not be with the Lord’s authority, i.e., according to the notion of divine wisdom; and then you would be right in not taking me as speaking according to God, but foolishly: “For it is not the man who commends himself that is accepted, but the man whom the Lord commends” (2 Cor. 10:18); “Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips” (Prov. 27:2).

413. – He indicates the reason why he commends himself and glories, when he says, since many boast of worldly things [according to the flesh], I too will boast. Here it should be noted that the false apostles, because they were Jews, gloried according to the flesh, saying that they were sons of Abraham. They hoped thereby to be held in reverence and authority by the Corinthians. Therefore, the Apostle says: granted that it is foolish for me to glory according to the flesh, yet because many, namely the false apostles, glory according to the flesh, I too will even glory according to the flesh: “Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes” (Prov. 26:5).

414. – But on the other hand, Seneca says: “The greatest of evils is to live by the example of evil men”; “You shall not follow a multitude to do evil”(Ex. 23:2). Therefore, the Apostle should not glory according to the flesh on the ground that the false apostles glory. I answer that although both are glorying about the same thing, the intention and end are not the same, because the false apostles commended themselves for their own glory and to acquire authority and gain; but the Apostle glories in order that the word of God preached by him might have greater authority and weight and bear fruit for Christ.

415. – Then he tells why they should bear with him, saying: you gladly bear with fools, being wise yourselves. First, he gives this reason, namely, that they should bear with him. For they could say: Why should we bear with you, if you are foolish? And the Apostle says that the reason is this: since you yourselves are wise in your own eyes and in your reputation, you gladly bear with, i.e., are wont to bear with, fools, namely, the false apostles.

416. – Secondly, he shows wherein they bear with the foolish and points out five cases of oppression imposed by the false apostles. The first is the yoke of slavery; as to this he says, for you bear it if a man, i.e., the false apostles, makes slaves of you. As if to say: through Christ you were freed from the bondage of the Law, which is in fear, and were raised to the freedom of the sons of God, which is charity: “So, brethren, we are not children of the slave but of the free woman” (Gal. 4:31). And yet you suffer the false apostles, who take such liberty from you and reduce you to the slavery of the Law, because they compel you to observe the ceremonies of the Law: “Do not submit again to a yoke of slavery” (Gal. 5:1). With greater reason, then, should you bear with me, who want to preserve you in the freedom of Christ, than with the false apostles, who wish to reduce you to the slavery of the Law. The second is a very heavy burden, because the false apostles live sumptuously on your goods, but we do not: “I do not mean that others should be eased and you burdened” (2 Cor. 8:13). Therefore he says: or preys upon [devours] you: “Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you devour the houses of widows, praying long prayers. For this you shall receive the greater judgment” (Matt. 23:14). The third oppression is depredation and despoilation, because they literally took everything from them with soft words and under the pretext of piety; as to this he says, or take advantage of you, i.e., smoothly deceive you by taking your property: “By fair and flattering words they deceive the hearts of the simple-minded” (Rom. 16:18). The fourth oppression is their excessive vaunting of themselves over them along with contempt for the Corinthians; therefore he says: or puts on airs by conducting himself in a conceited manner: “Do not exalt yourself through your soul’s counsel, lest your soul be torn in pieces like a bull” (Sir. 6:2). The fifth oppression is verbal abuse; for the false apostles not only oppressed them in these ways but added reproaches by saying insulting things to them and especially about their low estate. For because they were Jews and worshippers of the one true God, they called themselves noble and the Corinthians ignoble, because they were not of the seed of Abraham or circumcised, but descended from idolaters; as to this he says, or strikes you in the face, i.e., insults you publicly and says harmful things. For these harmful things, I was too weak, I must say, to my shame, and yet you bear with them and not with us, as if we were too weak for that and for the glory you have attributed to them by preferring them to us, especially since the false apostles say that the reason we do not say or do such things to you is that we are weak in this part, i.e., because we are lowly: “We are weak, but you are strong. You are held in honor, but we in disrepute” (1 Cor. 4:10).
