# Chapter 32

6 He has made us competent to be ministers of a new covenant, not in a written code but in the Spirit; for the written code kills, but the Spirit gives life. 7 Now if the dispensation of death, carved in letters on stone, came with such splendor that the Israelites could not look at Moses’ face because of its brightness, fading as this was, 8 will not the dispensation of the Spirit be attended with greater splendor? 9 For if there was splendor in the dispensation of condemnation, the dispensation of righteousness must far exceed it in splendor. 10 Indeed, in this case, what once had splendor has come to have no splendor at all, because of the splendor that surpasses it. 11 For if what faded away came with splendor, what is permanent must have much more splendor.

88. – Having commended the ministry of the New Testament, the Apostle then commends its ministers. First, he stipulates two things, which correspond to the above words. For he had mentioned a gift received from God when he said, our competence is from God, and the confidence born of this gift when he said, such is the confidence that we have through Christ toward God. First, therefore, he determines the things pertaining to the gift received; secondly, those pertaining to the confidence born of it (v. 12). In regard to the first he does three things: first, he discloses the gift received from God, namely, the ministry of the New Testament; secondly, he describes the New Testament (v. 6b); thirdly, from the dignity of the New Testament he shows the dignity of its ministers (v. 9).

89. – He says, therefore: I say that our sufficiency is from God who has made us competent to be ministers of a new covenant: “Men shall speak of you as the ministers of our God” (Is. 61:6). And in this we hold the place of angels: “Who make angels your messengers, fire and flame your ministers” (Ps. 104:4). But he not only made us ministers, but fit ones. For God gives to each being the things through which it can attain to the perfection of its nature. Hence, because God constituted ministers of the New Testament, he made them fit to exercise this office, unless he was impeded on the part of the receivers: “Who is sufficient for these things” (2 Cor. 2:16), namely, as are the Apostles instituted by God.

90. – He describes what this New Testament is when he continues, not in a written code but in the Spirit. He describes it in regard to two things, namely, as to that in which it consists and as to its cause for which it has been given: for the written code kills. In regard to the first it should be noted that the Apostle speaks profoundly, for it is stated in Jeremiah (31:31): “I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not like the covenant which I made with their fathers”; and later on (v. 33): “I will put my law within them, and I will write it on their hearts; and I will be their God and they shall be my people.” The Old Testament, therefore, is written in a book, later to be sprinkled with blood, as it says in Hebrews (9:19): “He took the blood of calves and goats and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, saying: ‘This is the blood of the covenant which God commanded you.’” So it is clear that the Old Law is a covenant of words, but the New Covenant is a covenant of the Holy Spirit, by whom the love of God is poured out in our hearts [Et sic patet, quod vetus lex est testamentum litterae. Sed Novum Testamentum est testamentum Spiritus Sancti, quo charitas Dei diffunditur in cordis nostris], as it says in Rom. 5:5. Consequently, when the Holy Spirit produces charity in us, which is the fulness of the Law, it is a New Covenant, not in a written code, i.e., not written down, but in the Spirit, i.e., through the Spirit who gives life: “The law of the Spirit of life” (Rom. 8:2), i.e., life-giving.

91. – The reason why the New Testament was given by the Spirit is indicated when he says, for the written code kills, not as a cause but as an occasion. For the written Law only gives knowledge of sin: “For through the Law comes knowledge of sin” (Rom. 3:20). But as a result of merely knowing sin, two things follow. For the Law, although sin is known by it, does not repress concupiscence, but is the occasion of increasing it, inasmuch as concupiscence is enkindled the more by something forbidden. Hence such knowledge kills, when the cause of concupiscence has not yet been destroyed. As a result it adds to the sin. For it is more grievous to sin against the written and natural law than against the natural law only: “But sin, finding opportunity in the commandment, wrought in me all kinds of concupiscence” (Rom. 7:8). But although it is the occasion of killing inasmuch as it increases concupiscence and increases the sin, the Law is not evil, because at least it forbids evil; nevertheless, it is imperfect, inasmuch as it does not remove the cause. Therefore, the Law without the Spirit inwardly impressing the Law on the heart is the occasion of death; hence, it was necessary to give the Law of the Spirit, who gives life by producing charity in the heart: “It is the Spirit that gives life” (Jn. 6:63).

92. – From these, therefore, he shows the dignity of his ministry. He does two things in this regard. First, he shows that the ministry of the New Testament is preferred to the Old; secondly, that it is not only preferred, but that in comparison to the Old Testament, the latter has, as it were, nothing of glory (v. 10). In regard to the first, he does two things. First, he shows that the ministry of the New Testament is preferred to the Old; secondly, he assigns the reason for this (v. 9).

93. – In regard to the first, it should be noted that the Apostle argues from a statement in Exodus (34:24), where our text says that Moses had his face horned, so that the people of Israel could not come near. Another version says that his face shone, and this is better. For it should not be supposed that he literally had horns, as some depict him, but he is described as horned because of the rays which seemed to be like horns. He argues from this in the following way: first, by a similarity and by arguing from the lesser. For it is obvious that if something less has glory, then much more something which is greater. But the Old Testament is less than the New: therefore, since the former was in glory, so that the Israelites could not look at Moses’ face, it seems that the New is much more in glory.

94. – That the Old Testament is less than the New he proves in three ways. First, from its effect, because the former is a covenant of death, but the latter of life, as has been said. In regard to this he says, If the dispensation of death, i.e., the Old, which is the occasion of death; and this corresponds to what he said, namely, that the written code kills, but the Spirit gives life. Secondly, as to the way it was delivered, for the Old was delivered written on stone tablets, but the New was impressed by the Spirit on human hearts. He suggests this when he says, carved in letters, i.e., perfectly formed, on stone, i.e., on tablets of stone. This corresponds to his statement, not in a written code but in the Spirit. Thirdly, as to perfection: for the glory of the Old Testament is without assurance, because the Law brought no one to perfection. But in the New there is glory with the hope of a better glory, i.e., eternal: “My salvation will be forever” (Is. 51:6). This is suggested when he says, fading as this was: “If you receive circumcision, Christ will be of no advantage to you” (Gal. 5:2). He states the conclusion when he says, will not the dispensation of the Spirit be attended with greater glory? which is plain.

95. – Then he assigns the reason for all these when he says, For if there was glory in the dispensation of condemnation, the dispensation of justice must far exceed it in glory. This is his reasoning: Glory is owed more to justice than to condemnation, but the ministry of the New Testament is a ministry of justice, because it justifies by giving life within. The ministry of the Old Testament is a ministry of condemnation, as being its occasion: the written code kills, but the Spirit gives life. Therefore, since the dispensation of condemnation, i.e., the ministry of the Old Testament, is the occasional cause of condemnation, as has been said, is in glory, which appeared on the face of Moses, it is obvious that much more abundant in glory, i.e., gives an abundance of glory to its ministers, is the dispensation of justice, i.e., of the New Testament, by which the Spirit is given through whom is given justice and the fulfillment of the virtues: “The wise shall possess glory” (Prov. 3:35).

96. – It is customary here to compare Moses and Paul; but if the Apostle’s words are considered carefully, this is not necessary, because ministries not persons are being compared.

97. – But because the false apostles could say that even though the ministry of the New Covenant is greater than that of the Old, it is not much greater. Therefore, it is good for us to continue in that ministry, which they did, because they observed the ceremonies of the Law along with the Gospel. Therefore the Apostle rejects this when he says, indeed, in this case, what once had glory has come to have no glory at all, because of the glory that surpasses it. In regard to this he does two things. First, he shows that the ministry of the New Testament exceeds that of the Old beyond all comparison. Secondly, he assigns the reason for this (v. 11).

98. – He says, therefore, I have said that the ministry of justice abounds in glory to such a degree that the glory of the Old Testament should not be called glorious, for what once had glory has come to have no glory at all by reason of the glory that surpasses it. This is explained in two ways. First, that that glory is nothing in comparison to that of the New Testament, because such glory was not conferred on all the ministers, but on Moses alone, and it did not shine on Moses entirely, but in part, i.e., on his face alone. Therefore, it has come to have no glory at all, i.e., should not be glorified because of the glory that surpasses it, i.e., in comparison to the excelling glory of the New Testament, which abounds in grace, so that men purified by it might not see the glory of a man but of God. It is explained in a second way by punctuating it thus: that which was glorious in this part has come to have no glory: as if to say, for in this part, i.e., in respect to this particular nature, that we are servants, has come to have no glory, i.e., that was not glorious which shone in the Old Testament: and this by reason of the glory that surpasses it, which is in the New, because it is the glory of God the Father.

99. – Then he assigns the cause of this when he says, For if what faded away came with glory, what is permanent must have much more glory. His reasoning is thus: that which was given to pass away is nothing in relation to that which is given to remain always. If, therefore, the Old Testament, which is rendered void, is done away with: “But when the perfect comes, the imperfect will pass away” (1 Cor. 13:10). For with glory the ministry of Moses came, at least with a particular glory. And it is obvious that the New Testament remains, because it is begun here and completed in heaven: “Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away” (Lk. 21:33). It will be much more in eternal glory, in which it will be perfected; it will be, I say, for us who are its ministers.
