# Chapter 3, Lecture 1

> 1 Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we need, as some do, letters of recommendation to you, or from you? 2 You yourselves are our letter of recommendation, written on your hearts, to be known and read by all men; 3 and you show that you are a letter from Christ delivered by us, written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on tablets of human hearts. 4 Such is the confidence that we have through Christ toward God. 5 Not that we are competent of ourselves to claim anything as coming from us; our competence is from God.

78. – After presenting his excuse, by which he won the good will of his hearers, the Apostle continues toward his main intention, namely, to treat about the ministers of the New Testament. In regard to this he does two things: first, he commends the dignity of the good ministers; secondly, he expands on the guilt of the evil ministers (chap. 10ff.). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he commends the ministry of the New Testament; secondly, he commends the exercise of this ministry in others by exhorting them to this (chap. 6). In regard to the first he commends the ministry of the New Testament from three aspects: first, in this chapter, from its dignity; secondly, from its exercise (chap. 4); thirdly, from its reward (chap. 5). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he removes an objection; secondly, he commends the ministers of the New Testament (v. 6). In regard to the first it should be noted that the Apostle intended to commend the ministers of the New Testament, of which he is one. Therefore, lest the Corinthians object that in doing this he wishes to commend himself, he at once removes this, saying, Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Here he does two things: he first raises the question and then he answers it.

79. –The question is this: I say that we do not adulterate the Word of God as the false apostles do, but we speak with sincerity as from God. But in saying this, are we beginning to commend ourselves again?, i.e., are we saying this because we want to procure our glory and not that of God? And he says, again, because in the first epistle he had commended himself enough, when he said (3:10): “Like a skilled master builder I laid a foundation.” Therefore, we are not saying this to seek our own glory, but God’s: “Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips” (Prov. 27:2).

80. – He answers this when he says, Or do we need? Here he shows that he is not happy to commend himself. In regard to this he does two things: first, he shows that he does not need man’s commendation; secondly, that he does not require it of them (v. 4). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he shows that he does not need their commendation; secondly, he assigns the cause of this (v. 2).

81. – He says, therefore: I say that we do not begin to commend ourselves, because we do not need commendation. And this is what he says: Do we, the true ministers, need as some do, namely the false apostles, letters of recommendation, i.e., praise, to you by others, or from you to others? But on the other hand, he says in Colossians (4:10): “Mark, the cousin of Barnabas, greets you.” Even papal legates always carry letters of recommendation. Therefore it is not an evil. I answer that to accept such letters from famous persons, who are commended and honored by reason of them alone, until they become known by their good works, is not evil: that is what papal legates do. But the Apostle was already so well known and recommended among them by his works, that he did not need letters of recommendation.

82. – Therefore he at once gives the reason for this, saying, you yourselves are our letter of recommendation; as if to say: I have a good letter; I do not need others. In regard to this, he does two things: first, he shows what that letter is which he has; secondly, he explains this (v. 3). In regard to the first he does two things: first he shows what that letter is; secondly, he shows that it is sufficient for commending him (v. 3b). He says, therefore, you are our letter, i.e., the letter through which our dignity is made manifest, by which we are commended, so that we do not need other letters: “You are our glory” (1 Th. 2:20); “My little children, with whom I am again in travail, until Christ be formed in you” (Gal. 4:19). But is this letter sufficient? Yes, because it is written on your hearts. Here he touches on two things causing the sufficiency of such letters. One is that it should be understood and known by the one for whom it is sent; the other that he still seeks, and not that he knows himself to have it. As to this he says, written on our hearts, because we always have you in mind, having a special care for you: “I hold you in my heart” (Phil. 1:7). The other is that he to whom it is sent may read and know it; hence, he says, to be known and read by all men. To be known, I say, because you have been instructed and converted by us; but it is read, because by our example even others imitate you: “Write the vision; make it plain upon tablets, so he may run who reads it” (Hab. 2:2).

83. – Then he explains how this letter is known, saying, you show that you are a letter from Christ, and in regard to this he does three things. First, he explains whose letter it is; secondly, how it was written; thirdly, on what. He shows whose it is when he says, from Christ. Hence, he says, you show that you are a letter from Christ, i.e., informed and led by Christ, principally and authoritatively: “For you have one teacher” (Matt. 23:8), but by us secondarily and instrumentally. Hence he adds, delivered by us: “This is how one should regard us, as servants of Christ” (1 Cor. 4:1); “What then is Apollos? What is Paul? Servants through whom you believed” (1 Cor. 3:5) He shows how it was written, not with ink, i.e., not mixed with errors, as the letters of the false apostle; not changeable and imperfect as the Old Law, which led no one to perfection (cf. Heb. 7:19); for black ink is that by which error is understood, and delible by which changeableness is understood. It is written not with ink, I say, but with the Spirit of the living God, i.e., by the Holy Spirit, by whom you live and by whose teaching you have been instructed: “In whom you were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit” (Eph. 1:13). He suggests where it is written, when he says, not on tablets of stone, as the Old Law, to exclude hardness; as if to say: not in the stony hearts of the hard-hearted, as the Jews: “You stiff-necked people, uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit” (Ac. 7:51); but on tablets of human hearts, i.e., hearts opened by charity, and human, i.e., made receptive as a result of filling and understanding: “I will take out of your flesh the heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh” (Ez. 36:26).

84. – Such is the confidence that we have through Christ toward God. Above, the Apostle excused himself, that he was not seeking his own glory, because he did not need it; here he proves that he is not seeking his own glory. Indeed, everything good he does he attributes not to himself but to God. In regard to this he does two things: first, he attributes all the good he has and does to God; secondly, he gives the reason for this.

85. – He says, therefore: I say that we do not need letters of recommendation and that you are our letter ministered by us. Nor do we seek our glory, but Christ’s. Such is the confidence, i.e. to say such things, that we have through Christ toward God, i.e., we refer it to God. Or I have such confidence in God, by whose power I say these things, because he works in me, and the confidence we have through Christ, through whom we have access to the Father, as it says in Romans (5:2), who unites us to God: “Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord, whose trust is the Lord” (Jer. 17:7). And I have this confidence because I am united to God through Christ: “I will act confidently in him” (Ps. 11:6, Vulgate).

86. – But the cause of this confidence is that whatever I do, I attribute to the very beginning of the work to God. Therefore, he says, not that we are competent of ourselves to claim anything as coming from us, much less say and accomplish. For in the pursuit of any work there is first an assent, which is done by thinking, then discussion by word, and finally accomplishment by work. Hence if a person does not have the thinking from himself but from God, there is no doubt that not only the completion of a good work is from God, but even the very beginning: “He who began a good work in you will bring it to completion at the day of Jesus Christ” (Phil. 1:6). This is contrary to the Pelagians, who say that the beginning of a good work is from us, but its completion is from God: “O Lord, you have wrought for us all our works” (Is. 26:12). But lest this seem to take away free will, he says, of ourselves, i.e., on our part, and commends divine grace when he says, as coming from us, i.e., as though it came from us, rather than God.

87. – The Philosopher also teaches that a man can never do any good through his free will without God’s help. The reason is that in the things we do it is necessary to seek that for which we do it. But there can be no infinite process, for we must come to something which is first, e.g., to counsel. Thus, therefore, I do good, because there is in me the counsel to do so, and this is from God. Hence, he says that the counsel of something good is from something above man, moving him to act well; and this is God, who moves men and all things that act to their actions; but men are moved in one way, and other things in another. For since motion of this kind is something received into the thing moved, it is necessary that this be done according to the mode of its nature, i.e., of the thing moved. And therefore he moves all things according to their natures. Therefore, those things whose nature is to have free will and have dominion over their actions, he moves in such a way that they act freely, as rational and intellectual creatures. But others not freely, but according to the mode of their nature. But although we are not sufficient to think anything of ourselves as coming from ourselves, yet we have a certain sufficiency, namely that by which we are able to will the good, and to begin to believe, and this is from God: “What have you that you did not receive?” (1 Cor. 4:7).
