# Chapter 11, Lecture 5

> 21b But whatever any one dares to boast of—I am speaking as a fool—I also dare to boast of that. 22 Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I. 23 Are they servants of Christ? I am a better one—I am talking like a madman—with far greater labors, far more imprisonments, with countless beatings, and often near death. 24 Five times I have received at the hands of the Jews the forty lashes less one. 25 Three times I have been beaten with rods; once I was stoned. Three times I have been shipwrecked; a night and a day I have been adrift at sea; 26 on frequent journeys, in danger from rivers, danger from robbers, danger from my own people, danger from Gentiles, danger in the city, danger in the wilderness, danger at sea, danger from false brethren.

417. – Having given the reasons for commending himself and the causes why they should bear with him, he now begins to commend himself. In regard to this he does two things. First, he shows himself equal to the false apostles and others who commended themselves; secondly, he prefers himself to them (v. 23b). The Apostle makes himself their equal in glory. But glory is of two kinds: one is according to the flesh and is slight and worthy of scorn; hence he says to the Philippians (3:7): “But whatever gain I had, I counted as loss for the sake of Christ”; the other in according to Christ, because “it is great glory to follow the Lord” (Sir. 23:38, Vulgate), and this should be sought: “But far be it from me to glory except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ” (Gal. 6:14). The Apostle therefore makes himself equal to them in regard to both glories: first, in regard to the first; secondly, in regard to the second (v. 23).

418. – First, he shows himself equal to them in general, saying: receive me as one who is foolish, provided it is foolish, for I speak hypothetically; because whatever any one dares to boast of or to take for granted about himself and to commend himself, I can dare and commend myself on the same matters in which they commend themselves, because they have no better reason than I to commend themselves. I am speaking as a fool, i.e., I say that I am acting foolishly; yet he was acting wisely, because he was not doing this to boast, but to humiliate the false apostles: “I think that I am not in the least inferior to these superlative apostle” (2 Cor. 11:5).

419. – Secondly, when he says, Are they Hebrews? So am I, he shows in detail that he is equal to them, indicating one by one the points in which he is equal to them, and in which the false apostles found glory. But they took glory and commended themselves on three points. First, in their nationality and tongue, because they called themselves Hebrews; secondly in their race, because they said they were of the race of Israel; thirdly, in the promise, because they said they were partakers of the promise to Abraham, since they were of his seed. So he shows that he is equal to them on these three points. First, as to nationality, as if to say: I am as they are. It should be noted that, as some say, they are called Hebrews from Abraham, because before him that name was uncommon. But it can be said, and perhaps better, that the word is derived from a certain Eber mentioned in Gen. (11:14-15): “Shelah had lived thirty years, he became the father of Eber,” and then Eber lived thirty-four years and begot Peleg. It was during this time that languages became distinct, and the language of the Hebrews remained in the family. Secondly, he shows himself equal to them in race, saying Are they Israelites? So am I, namely, according to rite. Thirdly, as to the third he says: Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I. Of these three things it says in Phil. (3:4): “If any other man thinks he has reason for confidence in the flesh, I have more, circumcised on the eighth day” as to the third point; “Of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin,” as to the second point; “A Hebrew born of Hebrews,” as to the first: “I myself am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, a member of the tribe of Benjamin” (Rom. 11:1).

420. – Thus, it is clear that I am not inferior to them as to the glory, which is according to the flesh; nor even as to the glory which is according to Christ, because they are servants of Christ, i.e., they say so to deceive you; I am a better one: “This is how one should regard us, as servants of Christ” (1 Cor. 4:1); “Who has made us competent to be ministers of a new covenant” (2 Cor. 3:6).

421. – Then when he says, I am talking like a madman, he prefers himself to all the apostles and to the false. First, in regard to evils endured; secondly, as to benefits received (chap.12). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he prefers himself as to evils endured; secondly, as to the manner in which he avoided evils (v. 32). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he proposes that he should be preferred to the others; secondly, he shows in what he should be preferred (v. 23c); thirdly, he confirms some of the statements (v. 30).

422. – He says therefore: I am talking like a madman; because I commend myself and make myself equal to the others, how less wise will I seem to you, if I prefer myself to them. Therefore he says: not only am I a minister of Christ, as the others, but as one less wise according to your opinion, I say that I am a better minister of Christ than they; and as to this he says that he should be preferred to them: “I magnify my ministry” (Rom. 11:13) by placing it ahead of the ministry of the others.

423. – Then he indicates the matters in which he should be preferred, saying, with far greater labours. As if to say: in this I am more, because I am more obviously a minister of Christ. First, as to the evils inflicted; secondly, as to evils voluntarily assumed (v. 26). First, he mentions in general the evils inflicted, saying: I am more, namely, a proven minister; with far greater labours than they, even though they have undertaken some labours: “I worked harder than any of them” (1 Cor. 15:10). Secondly, he lists those evils in detail. First, as to the squalor of prison, because far more imprisonments, namely, than they: “And when they had inflicted many blows upon them”—namely, on Paul and his companions—”they threw them into prison” (Ac. 16:23).

Secondly, as to the pains of floggings, because with countless beatings, i.e., above the measure of human virtue, or above the measure of human custom: “In beatings, imprisonments, tumults, labors, watching, hunger” (2 Cor. 6:5). But this seems to be contrary to what is stated in 1 Cor. (10:13): “God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond your strength.” Therefore, not above the measure of human virtue. I answer that God does not permit us to be tried without the held of divine grace; that is why the Apostle said in 1 Cor. (15:10): “Not I, but the grace of God which is with me.” Then as to the terror of death; hence he says, and often near death, i.e., in the dangers and terrors of death. Hence he said in Rom. (8:36): “For your sake we are being killed all the day long”; “I die daily for your glory” (1 Cor. 15:31, Vulgate).

424. – Then he manifests the two extreme dangers he underwent. And first, the danger of lashes; secondly, the danger of death.

425. – But he shows the danger of lashes by citing those he suffered from his own, that is, from the Jews. Hence he says, Five times I have received at the hands of the Jews the forty lashes less one. It should be noted that, as it says in Deut. (25:2): “A number of stripes in proportion to his offense. Forty stripes may be given him, but not more; lest, if one should go on to beat him with more stripes than these, your brother be degraded in your sight.” This shows that men should be whipped for lesser sins, yet so that the victim never receive more than forty stripes. But the Jews, to appear merciful, always acted short of the Law, giving less than forty, according as it appeared to them. Therefore, because they hated Paul, whenever they flogged him, they omitted the least possible number of strokes below the Law’s limit, namely, giving only one less, i.e., thirty-nine. And this is what he received five times, namely, forty lashes less one. Secondly, he indicates the perils he endured from outsiders, namely, the Gentiles, saying: Three times I have been beaten with rods: “The magistrates tore the garments off them and gave orders to beat them with rods” (Ac. 16:22); “The tribune commanded him to be brought into the barracks, and ordered him to be examined by scourging”(Ac. 22:14).

426. – Then he discloses the perils of death he faced; and first of all those inflicted by men, saying: Once I was stoned. This happened in the city of Lycaonia, where he was struck down with stones and almost killed: “They stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead” (Ac. 14:18). Secondly, the perils endured from the works of nature, and particularly from the sea. He amplifies these, first from their number, because three times I have been shipwrecked; secondly, from their duration, because a night and a day I have been adrift at sea, which is more grievous; for the text says that although he suffered shipwreck a number of times, he remained in the water for a day and a half under the protection of God’s power. Hence he could say with Jonah (2:4): “For you cast me into the deep, into the heart of the seas, and the flood was round about me.”

427. – Having listed the evils inflicted from without, he then lists those he voluntarily assumed, when he says, on frequent journeys: first, external evils; secondly, internal evils (v. 28). He describes the external evils: first as to the evils that occur on journeys; secondly, as to those in houses (v. 27).

428. – In regard to the first he mentions his frequent journeys, saying on frequent journeys, namely, I am proved a minister of Christ by enduring many hard and difficult things patiently: “From Jerusalem and as far round as Illyricum I have fully preached the gospel of Christ” Rom. 15:19). Along with these he traveled along many roads, going to Rome and into Spain: “For the sake of the words of your lips, I have kept hard ways” (Ps. 17:4, Vulgate). Secondly, he mentions the dangers from journeys: first, the lesser ones; secondly, the more serious danger from false brethren. Among the lesser dangers he mentions three things, in regard to which he suffered many dangers. First, in regard to their causes, and these either from natural causes; hence he says, dangers from rivers, for streams naturally rise in the winter and are swift and very dangerous; or from malicious violence; as to this he says, in danger from robbers, whom the devil roused against him to rob him of his clothing: “His troops come on together; they have cast up siegeworks against me, and encamp round about my tent” (Job 19:12). Secondly, he lists the dangers that inspire fear either from his own; hence he says, in danger from my own people, i.e., managed by the Jews: or from outsiders; hence he says, in danger from Gentiles, who wanted to capture him for preaching the one true God. Consequently, he had no rest from his own or from others: “My mother, you bore me, a man of strife and contention to the whole land!” (Jer. 15:10). Thirdly, he lists the dangers as to their places. First, as to cities he says, danger in the city, i.e., in cities stirred up against me, as at Ephesus and Corinth (Ac. 18 & 19); or as to a desert place; hence he says, danger in the wilderness, either from evil beasts, as when a viper bit his hand (Ac. 28:3) as he was collecting sticks; or from want of food. Secondly, as to danger at sea, such as perils from plunderers and pirates: “Let those who sail the sea tell of its dangers” (Sir. 43:26, Vulgate). But he mentions a more serious danger, saying, danger from false brethren, i.e., from false Christians and heretics and false apostles: “Let every man beware of his neighbor” (Jer. 9:4).
