# Chapter 1, Lecture 2

3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort, 4 who comforts us in all our affliction, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction, with the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God. 5 For as we share abundantly in Christ’s sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too.

11. – Here begins the message, in which the Apostle does two things: first, he excuses himself for not visiting them as he had promised; secondly, he begins to follow out his intention (chap. 3). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he wins their good will; secondly, he presents his excuse (v. 15). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he wins their good will be citing some general facts; secondly, some special ones (v. 8). The Apostle wins their good will by showing that whatever he does, it is all for their benefit. In regard to this he does two things: first, he mentions the profit others have obtained from him; secondly, the reason (v. 5). In regard to the first he does three things: first, he gives thanks; secondly, the manner of the thanks (v. 4); thirdly, the cause (b. 4b).

12. – He gives thanks, therefore, to the entire Trinity, the source of every good; hence he says, Blessed be the God, i.e., the entire Trinity; and to the person of the Father when he says, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the Father has given us all things. It should be noted that we bless God and God blesses us, but in different ways. For when God speaks, he accomplishes: “He spoke and they were made” (Ps. 148:5). Hence, for God to bless is to produce something good, and to infuse something good, and so to be a cause: “I will indeed bless you and multiply your descendants” (Gen. 22:17). But our speech does not cause things, but acknowledges or expresses them; hence, our blessing is the same as recognizing good. Therefore, when we thank God, we bless him, i.e., acknowledge that he is good and the giver of all good: “Bless God and acknowledge him in the presence of all the living for the good things he has done for you.” (Tob. 12:6); “Bless the Lord, all you works of the Lord; praise and exalt him above all for ever” (Dan. 3:57).

13. – It is fitting that he thank the Father, because he is merciful; hence he says, the Father of mercies: and because he is a comforter he says, and God of all comfort. He thanks God for the two things men especially need: first, to have evil removed from them, and this is done by mercy which takes away misery, for it is characteristic of a father to have compassion: “As a father pities his children, so the Lord pities those who fear him” (Ps. 103: 13). Secondly, they need to be supported in the face of evils which occur, and that is to receive comfort. Because unless a man had something in which his heart could rest, he would not stand firm when evils come upon him. Therefore a person comforts another by affording him something refreshing, in which he can rest in evil times. And although a man might be comforted by something and find rest and be supported by it in the case of some evils, it is God alone who comforts us in all evils; hence he says, the God of all comfort. For if you sin, God comforts you, because he is merciful; if you are afflicted, he comforts you either by rooting out the affliction by his power or by judging justly; if you labor, he comforts you with a reward: “I am your shield; your reward shall be very great (Gen. 15:1). Therefore, it says in Matthew (5:4): “Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted.”

14. – He tells us why he is thankful when he adds, who comforts us in all our affliction. As if to say: He is blessed, because he comforts us in all our affliction: “God who comforts the downcast” (2 Cor. 7:6).

15. – He gives the reason for this when he says, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction. Here it should be noted that there is an order among God’s gifts. For God gives special gifts to some, that they may pour them out for the benefit of others; for he does not give light to the sun in order that the sun may shine for itself alone, but for the whole world. Hence, God desires that some profit accrue to others from all our gifts, whether they be riches or power of knowledge or wisdom: “As each has received a gift, employ it for one another” (1 Pet. 4:10). This then is what the Apostle says, who comforts us in all our affliction.

16. – But why? Not only for our benefit, but that it profit others too. Hence, he says, so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction. For we can comfort others by the example of our own comfort. For one who is not comforted does not know how to comfort others: “He who has not been tried, what manner of things does he know” (Sir. 34:9, Vulgate) about any affliction; “The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me to bring good tidings to the afflicted” (Is. 61:1); “He who comforts all who were mourning in Zion” (Sir. 48:27, Vulgate). We are able, I say, to comfort them by exhorting them to endure sufferings by promising eternal rewards, i.e., because we exhort you by the Scriptures and internal inspirations, in order that we may patiently endure and exhort others by our example and by the Scriptures themselves: “For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you” (1 Cor. 11:23); “What I have heard from the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, I announce to you” (Is. 21:10).

17. – Having mentioned the profit which comes to others from the apostles, he gives the reason for what he has said: For as we share abundantly in Christ’s sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too. And because he has said two things, namely, that God comforts us in every affliction and that we ourselves can also comfort others, he explains here the reason for these two things: first, he shows how God comforts us in every affliction; secondly, how our comfort is turned to the comfort of others (v. 6).

18. – He says, therefore, I am right in saying that he comforts us in every affliction, for as we share abundantly in Christ’s sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too. He says, in Christ’s sufferings, i.e., begun by Christ: “Begin at my sanctuary” (Ez. 9:6). For the sufferings for our sins began in Christ, because ‘he himself bore our sins in his body on the tree” (1 Pet. 2:24); then by the apostles, who said: “We are slain all the day long” (Ps. 44:22; Rom. 8:36); then by the martyrs, who were cut in two and were tempted (Heb. 11:37). Finally, sinners themselves will bear patiently God’s anger for their sins. Or the sufferings of Christ, i.e., what we endure for Christ: “Then they left the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the name” (Ac. 5:41); “For your sake we are slain all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the slaughter” (Ps. 44:22). Just as we share abundantly in these sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too: “When the cares of my heart are many, your consolations cheer my soul” (Ps. 94:19).
