# Chapter 103

13 But we will not boast beyond limit, but will keep to the limits God has apportioned us, to reach even to you. 14 For we are not overextending ourselves, as though we did not reach you; we were the first to come all the way to you with the gospel of Christ. 15 We do not boast beyond limit, in other men’s labors; but our hope is that as your faith increases, our field among you may be greatly enlarged, 16 so that we may preach the gospel in lands beyond you, without boasting of work already done in another’s field. 17 “Let him who boasts, boast of the Lord.” 18 For it is not the man who commends himself that is accepted, but the man whom the Lord commends.

365. – Having indicated the reason behind the things he had said, the Apostle now explains that reason. For he had said that he measures himself by himself and did not go beyond that measure. But a person could be excessive in two ways in glorying and commending himself. First, in regard to that about which he glories; for example, if he glories about something he does not have. Secondly, in regard to that in which he glories; for example, if a person has something from someone else, but glories in himself as though he has it of himself. Thus the Apostle shows that he did not go beyond the measure in glorying or praising himself. In regard to the first he does three things. First, he states his proposition; secondly, he proves it (v. 14); thirdly, he draws the conclusion (v. 15).

366. – He says therefore: I say that we measure and compare ourselves to ourselves, namely, by doing what our office demands. But in doing this we will not boast beyond limit [our measure], i.e., when we exercise our power and commend ourselves: “You shall do no wrong in judgment, in measures of length or weight or quantity” (Lev. 19:35); but will keep to the limits God has apportioned us. A Gloss [Lombard] explains this of the limit of the Apostle’s prelacy and says: according to the measure, i.e., according to the people measured out to him by God, the people whose prelate and rule of conduct he is. But this same thing can be taken more universally, such that the measure of the rule is the quantity of grace. Then the sense is this: but we glory according to the limits God has apportioned us, i.e., according to the amount of grace God has given us: “But grace was given to each of us according to the measure of Christ’s gift” (Eph. 4:7). This grace is a rule keeping us from being lifted up or separated from God. Which God has apportioned us, because whatever good we do in preaching the Gospel and in converting you and others, it is all from God, granted to me for you and others: “I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the growth” (1 Cor. 3:6). A measure, I say, to reach even to you, because you are under the measure of grace granted to me, by which you have been converted to Christ and obey the Gospel. Therefore, what he is proposing is this, namely, that he is not going beyond the measure of glorying and praising himself that he is their prelate and that they were converted by him.

367. – That this is so, namely, that it reaches even to them, he proves when he says: For we are not overextending ourselves, as though we did not reach you. As if to say: of course we glory, but we do not stretch beyond ourselves in our grace or glory or power, as if we do not reach to you in our power and ministry: we were the first to come all the way to you with the gospel of Christ, i.e., in the preaching of Christ’s Gospel: “For I became your father in Christ Jesus through the Gospel” (1 Cor. 4:15); “Are you not my workmanship in the Lord” (1 Cor. 9:1); “For he who worked through Peter for the mission to the circumcised worked through me also for the Gentiles” (Gal. 2:8).

368. – Therefore he draws the conclusion, saying: therefore, when I glory in you, I am not glorying beyond measure. Hence he says: We do not boast beyond limit, in other men’s labours, where someone else laid the foundation of faith.

369. – Then when he says, but our hope is that as your faith increases, our field among you may be greatly enlarged, he shows that he is not going beyond the measure, when he glories about the future. But it should be noted that a preacher has two reasons for glorying in his preaching: one is that those converted by his preaching are making progress; the other is that other people are converted by his converts, because as it says in Ex. (cf. 36:10): “Curtain is joined to curtain”; “And let him who hears say, ‘Come’” (Rev. 22:17). For one is easily converted when he sees others converted. In regard to those two things the Apostle hopes that his glorying in the Corinthians will be increased. First, in regard to their progress; hence he says: I say that we do not glory beyond measure over your conversion caused by us in the past, but will hope to be greatly enlarged in the future, i.e., for our glory to be increased in your increasing faith, and in the progress of your good works: “Long for the pure spiritual milk, that by it you may grow up to salvation” (1 Pet. 2:2). Secondly, we hope to be magnified in the conversion of others by you; therefore he says, abundantly, i.e., in the abundance of preaching not only among you but even in lands beyond you; and this according to our rule, i.e., according as Christ has enjoined us to preach not only to you but to all the Gentiles “Go into all the world and preach the gospel to the whole creation” (Mk. 16:15). Without boasting of work already done in another’s field, i.e., we do not hope to glory, nor do we glory in another man’s rule. As if to say: not in things prepared by others, i.e., whom others have brought to the faith, but I will bear fruit among those to whom others have not preached: “Thus making it my ambition to preach the gospel, not where Christ has already been named” (Rom. 15:20). But to the contrary, Peter preached at Rome before Paul preached there. I answer that he does not say this as though refusing to preach where another has preached; but he says that he intends to preach even where no other have preached.

370. – Then when he says, Let him who boasts, boast of the Lord, he shows that he is not going beyond the measure as to that in which he glories, saying: if I glory in him in whom one should glory, I am not going beyond. But since one should glory in God, Let him who boasts, boast of the Lord: “Let him who glories glory in this, that he understands and knows me” (Jer. 9:24). This can be explained in three ways: in one way, Let him who boasts, boast of the Lord, so that in the Lord denotes the object in which he glories. As if to say: let him glory in the fact that he possesses the Lord by knowing and loving. In another way, Let him who boasts, boast of the Lord, i.e., according to God; and one glories in this way when he glories in the things of God and not in evil, as the one who is asked in Ps. (52:1, Vulgate): “Why do you glory in malice?” In the third way, Let him who boasts, boast of the Lord, i.e., let him regard himself as having his glory from God, referring to God everything that redounds to his own glory: “What have you that you did not receive? If then you received it, why do you boast as if it were not a gift?” (1 Cor. 4:7). This is the way it is taken here when he says: Let him who boasts, boast of the Lord. As if to say: I glory in the foregoing, but not as though I had this from myself and not from God. And this is also your measure, because all your good has sprung from us. And indeed we should glory in the Lord, not imputing our glory to ourselves, but to God. For it is not the man who commends himself that is accepted, i.e., approved by God or by men: “Let another praise you, and not your own mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips” (Prov. 27:2), but the man whom the Lord commends, i.e., makes commendable by good works and miracles. For God is the cause of the entire good done by me.
