# Chapter 1, Lecture 1

> 1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother. To the church of God which is at Corinth, with all the saints who are in the whole of Achaia: 2 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. – In this epistle to the Corinthians, the Apostle treats of these ministers and points out their dignity: first, he gives his greeting; secondly, he begins his message (v. 3). In the greeting he does three things: first, he mentions the persons who send the greeting; secondly, those who are greeted; thirdly, the good things he wishes them. In regard to the first he does two things: first, he mentions the principal person who sends the greeting, namely Paul; secondly, his companion, Timothy.

4. – The person who sends the greeting is described by his humility, because it is Paul, which in Latin means ‘humble’. He is that humble person of whom it is said in Is. (60:22): “The least one shall become a clan, and the smallest one a mighty nation.” Or by his doctrine, because Paul is called the mouth of the trumpet. This is the trumpet mentioned in Zechariah (9:14): “The Lord God will sound the trumpet, and march forth in the whirlwinds of the south.” He fits what is said in Isaiah (58:1): “Lift up your voice like a trumpet.” By the authority of his dignity, because he says, an apostle of Jesus Christ. Here he mentions three things: first, that he is a representative; hence, he is called an apostle, i.e., principally sent, for only twelve apostles were sent by Christ: “He chose from them twelve, whom he named apostles” (Lk. 6:13). But the other disciples were not sent principally, but secondarily. That is why the apostles are succeeded by bishops, who have a special care of the Lord’s flock; but other priests succeed the seventy-two disciples and perform duties committed to them by the bishops. His dignity, therefore, is that he is an apostle: “If to others I am not an apostle, at least I am to you” (1 Cor. 9:2); “He who worked through Peter for the ministry to the circumcised worked through me also for the Gentiles” (Gal. 2:8). But why does he call himself an apostle, whereas in the epistle to the Romans he calls himself a servant. The reason for this is that he rebuked the Romans for quarreling and for pride, which is the mother of quarrels, because there are always disputes among the proud. Hence to cure them of quarreling he leads them to humility by calling himself a servant. But the Corinthians were obstinate and rebellious; so in order to curb their boldness, he uses a dignified name here, calling himself an apostle. Secondly, he mentions the one he represents, Jesus Christ: “We are ambassadors for Christ” (2 Cor. 5:20). Thirdly, he mentions how he obtained his ambassadorship, because he is not coming as a false apostle: “I did not send them and they ran” (Jer. 23:21), nor was he given to the people in God’s anger in the sense of Job (34:30): “Who makes a hypocrite to reign”; “I have given you kings, but in my anger” (Hos. 13:11). But he obtained apostleship by God’s will and pleasure: “He is a chosen instrument of mine” (Ac. 9:15). Therefore he says, by the will of God.

5. – The other person is Timothy; hence he says, and Timothy our brother. A brother, I say, because of the faith: “You are all brothers” (Matt. 23:8), and because of his dignity, for he was a bishop. This is why the Pope calls all bishops brothers. He mentions Timothy because, since he [Timothy] had visited them, as he said in the first epistle (ch. 16), the people might believe that he had maliciously reported to the Apostle the things he is writing to them.

6. – Then he mentions the persons greeted: first, the principal ones; secondly, those associated with the principal ones. He says, to the church of God, which includes all believers, both the clergy and the laity: “That you may know how one ought to behave” (1 Tim. 3:15); which is at Corinth, because Corinth was the chief city of Achaia. But those associated with the principal ones are all the saints who are reborn by the grace of the one Holy Spirit: “But you were washed, you were sanctified, in the Spirit of our God” (1 Cor. 6:11); who are in Achaia, whose chief city is Corinth.

7. – The Apostle wishes good things to the persons greeted; hence, he says, grace and peace to you. In regard to this he does two things: first, he mentions the good things; secondly, their author (v. 2b).

8. – He mentions these two gifts as two extremes, between which are contained all other goods. For the first good is grace, which is the beginning of all good things; because before grace there is only a diminished goodness in us. The last of all goods is peace, because peace is the general end of the mind; for no matter how peace is defined, it has the character of an end. In eternal glory, in government and in the way one lives, the end is peace: “He makes peace in your borders” (Ps. 147:14).

9. – He indicates the author of these goods when he says, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. These two expressions can be distinguished in two ways, because, when he says, from God our Father, it can be referred to the entire Trinity. For although the person of the Father is called the Father of Christ by nature, the entire Trinity in our Father by creation and governance: “For thou art our Father” (Is. 63:16); “You would call me My Father” (Jer. 3:19). Therefore good things come from God our Father, i.e., from the entire Trinity: “If you, then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him” (Matt. 7:11). But if God our Father is taken for the entire Trinity, why is the person of the Son added, when he says, and the Lord Jesus Christ? Is there another person in the Trinity? I answer that he is added, not as though he were an additional person, but on account of another nature, namely, of the humanity assumed by the Son to the divine person. The reason he lists him along with the Trinity is that all good things come to us from the Trinity through the Incarnation of Christ, first of all grace: “Grace and truth came through Jesus Christ” (Jn. 1:17), and secondly peace: “He is our peace” (Eph. 2:14).

10. – Again, when he says, from God our Father, it can be taken to mean the person of the Father alone; and although the entire Trinity is our Father, as has been said, the person of the Father is our Father by appropriation. Then the Lord Jesus Christ can be referred to the person of the Son. No mention is made of the Holy Spirit because, as Augustine says, since he is the nexus of the Father and the Son, whenever the person of the Father and the person of the Son are mentioned, the person of the Holy Spirit is also understood.
