# Chapter 13, Lecture 3

> 11 Finally, brethren, farewell. Mend your ways, heed my appeal, agree with one another, live in peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you. 12 Greet one another with a holy kiss. 13 All the saints greet you. 14 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all.

536. – Having rebuked those deceived by false apostles, the Apostle now comforts those who have persisted in his faith and doctrine. First, he gives an admonition; secondly, he adds a greeting (v. 12). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he gives the salutation; secondly, the reward of a fulfilled admonition (v. 11d). But he admonishes them on three points: first, what they should have been in themselves; secondly, in regard to their neighbor (v. 11b); thirdly, how all should act towards one another (v. 11c).

537. – They should have two qualities in themselves. The first is joy in the good they had; hence he says: finally brethren, who have been constant, farewell [rejoice] in the things you have done for God’s service. This is necessary, if you are to be just and virtuous, because no one is just or virtuous who does not take joy in just and virtuous activities. Therefore it says in Ps. 100 (2, Vulgate): “Sing joyfully to God, all the earth: serve the Lord with gladness”; “Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, Rejoice” (Phil. 4:4). Indeed, a person should always rejoice because joy keeps a man in good condition, whereas one cannot continue long that which causes sorrow. Secondly, the good should have in themselves a zeal for perfection; in regard to this he says, mend your ways [be perfect], i.e., always tend to what is perfect: “Therefore let us leave the elementary doctrine of Christ and go on to maturity [perfectionem]” (Heb. 6:1). What is said here is not a precept to be perfect, but always tend toward perfection. And this is necessary because a person who does not aim at progressing is in danger of falling back. For we notice that unless the rowers strive to go forward, the ship always goes backward. This is what the Lord said: “You, therefore, must be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect” (Matt. 5:48).

538. – To our neighbor we must give exhortations to good; in regard to this he says, heed my appeal: “And he gave to every one of them commandment concerning his neighbour” (Sir. 17:12, Vulgate); “He who exhorts, in his exhortation” (Rom. 12:8); “And let him who hears say ‘Come’” (Rev. 22:17).

539. – There are two things which should be common to all, namely, that they agree: therefore he says, agree with one another; and that they be at peace: hence he says, live in peace. These two things are so related that one is external and the other internal. For it is clear that bodies cannot be preserved and kept orderly unless the members are mutually coordinated. In like manner neither the Church nor the members of the Church, unless they are in proper order and united one with another. But there is a double union required for uniting the members of the Church: one is interior, that is, that they agree by faith in regard to the intellect by believing the same things, and by love in the will by loving the same things. Hence he says, agree with one another, i.e., agree in regard to matters of faith, and love the same things with the affection of charity. For true wisdom is present when the activity of the intellect is perfected and consummated by the repose and delight experienced by the affections: “That together you may with one voice glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ” (Rom. 15:6); “That all of you agree” (1 Cor. 1:10); “Complete my joy by being of the same mind, having the same love, being in full accord and of one mind” (Phil. 2:2). The other is exterior, namely, peace: therefore he says, live in peace among yourselves: “Strive for peace with all men” (Heb. 12:14); “Seek peace, and pursue it” (Ps. 34:15); “Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times in all ways” (2 Th. 3:16).

540. – Then when he says, the God of love and peace will be with you, he mentions the reward given to those who fulfil these admonitions. As if to say: if you keep peace among you, the God of love and peace will be with you. In regard to this it should be noted that among the Gentiles was a custom that certain gifts be used as names for the gods, because although there is but one God, nevertheless certain special gifts were used for naming the gods from those gifts. Thus, from the gift of peace they call a god the god of peace, and from the gift of salvation, the god of salvation. Alluding to this practice, the Apostle says: the God of love and peace will be with you, not that peace is one god, as they said, but Christ is called the God of peace because he is the giver of peace and is one who loves: “My peace I give to you” (Jn. 14:27); “For God is not a God of confusion but of peace” (1 Cor. 14:53); “God’s love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit which has been given to us” (Rom. 5:5). He is also the author of peace: “In me you may have peace. In the world you have tribulation” (Jn. 16:33); “His abode has been established in peace” (Ps. 71:3, Vulgate). Furthermore, he is not only the God of peace, but also of love; hence, he says: the God of love and peace will be with you. This is so, because a person who exists in true peace of heart and body exists in charity, and “He who abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him” (1 Jn. 4:16); and because a person merits only through peace and love” “If a man loves me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him” (Jn. 14:23).

541. – Then when he says, Greet one another with a holy kiss, he gives the salutation. In regard to this he does three things. First, he enjoins on them a mutual greeting; secondly, he greets them on the part of others (v. 12b); thirdly, he greets them on his own part (v. 13).

542. – He requests that the mutual greeting be made with a kiss; hence he says: Greet one another with a holy kiss. Here it should be noted that a kiss is a sign of peace. For a man breathes through the mouth with which a kiss is given. Therefore, when men give one another kisses, it is a sign that they are uniting their spirit of peace. But there is a false peace, and this is done by those who “speak peace with their neighbors, while mischief is in their hearts” (Ps. 28:3), which is accomplished with the deceit of a kiss: “Better are the wounds of a friend, than the deceitful kisses of an enemy” (Prov. 27:6, Vulgate). There is also an evil and degrading peace, namely, when men come together to commit evil: “Afterward it was not enough for them to err about the knowledge of God, but they live in great strife due to ignorance, and they call such great evils peace” (Wis. 14:22). And this is sealed with a lustful kiss. In Prov. (7:13, Vulgate) it is said of an evil woman that “Catching the young man, she kisses him, and with an impudent face, flatters him.” There is also a holy peace which God produces: “And the peace of God, which passes all understanding, will keep your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus” (Phil. 4:7), and this is obtained by a holy kiss, because it unites the spirit with holiness. It is of this kiss that he says here: with a holy kiss. From this there arose the practice whereby believers and holy men kiss one another as a sign of charity and union

543. – He greets them on the part of the others when he says, all the saints greet you, because all the saints and faithful hope and desire and procure our salvation with their prayers. Hence, all of Christ’s faithful hope and desire salvation for one another: “Make me a partaker, O God” (Ps. 119, Aquinas Latin).

544. – He greets them on his own part, when he says: The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all. Here it should be noted that there are two modes of appropriating something to the divine persons: one is essentially [essentialiter] and the other causally [causaliter]. Essentially power [potentia] is appropriated to the Father because he is power essentially; inasmuch as he is the principle. To the Son, wisdom, inasmuch as he is the Word. To the Holy Spirit, love, inasmuch as he is goodness. But here the Apostle does not appropriate those things in this way, namely, by essence [per essentiam], because then all things would be appropriated to the Holy Spirit; rather, he appropriates by cause [per causam]. Therefore, since grace is a gift by which sins are forgiven: “Justified by his grace as a gift” (Rom. 3:24), and the remission of sin is accomplished in us by the Son who took our flesh and satisfied for our sins: “Grace and truth came through Jesus Christ” (Jn. 1:17): for this reason the Apostle attributes grace to Christ, when he says, the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. But charity is necessary for us because we must become united to God: “He who abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him” (1 Jn. 4:16). And because this is from God the Father, inasmuch as he so loved the world as to send his only begotten Son (Jn. 3:16): “God shows his love for us” (Rom. 5:8), he attributes charity to him as to its source, when he says, and the love of God, namely, the Father. Finally, the communication of divine gifts is accomplished by the Holy Spirit: “All these are inspired by one and the same Spirit” (1 Cor. 12:11). Therefore he attributes communication to the Holy Spirit, when he says, and the fellowship [participation] of the Holy Spirit. Or, he attributes this to him because he is common to the other two persons.

545. – Thus therefore the Apostle in his greeting wishes them all things that are necessary when he says: The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all. The grace of Christ, by which we are made just and are saved; the charity of God the Father, by which we are united to him; and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit distributing divine gifts to us. Amen.
