# Chapter 4, Lecture 2

3 And even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled only to those who are perishing. 4 In their case the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, to keep them from seeing the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the likeness of God. 5 For what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, with ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake. 6 For it is the God who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” who has shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ.

122. – Here the Apostle answers a tacit objection. For someone could say to him: you say that you do not grow faint in manifesting the truth of Christ. But this does not seem true, because many people contradict you. To this question, therefore, he responds. And in regard to it he does two things: first, he responds to this question; secondly, he removes a doubt which seems to follow from his answer (v. 5). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he shows from whom Christ’s truth is hidden; secondly, the reason for this hiding (v. 4); thirdly, he shows that it is not due to a deficiency in the truth of the Gospel that it is hidden (v. 4b).

123. – He says therefore: I have said that we do not faint in manifesting the truth; but even if our gospel, which we preach, is veiled, it is not veiled from all, but it is veiled only to those who are perishing, namely, who offer an obstacle to its manifestation to them: “For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God” (1 Cor. 1:18).

124. – The cause of this concealment is not on the part of the Gospel, but on account of their own guilt and malice; and this is what he adds: in their case the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelievers. This can be explained in three ways: in one way so that the god of this world, i.e. God, who is the Lord of this world and of all things by creation and nature: “The earth is the Lord’s and the fullness thereof, the world and those who dwell therein” (Ps. 24:1), has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, not by producing malice, but by the merit, or rather demerit of preceding sins, by withdrawing his grace: “Make the heart of this people fat, and their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and turn and be healed” (Is. 6:10). Therefore he hints at their preceding sins when he says, of unbelievers, as though their unbelief is the cause of this blindness. In a second way, so that the god of this world, i.e., the devil, who is called the god of this world, i.e., of those who live in a worldly manner, not by reason of creation but by imitation, because worldly persons imitate him: “They follow him that are on his side” (Wis. 2:25, Vulgate). Here he blinds them by suggesting, by attracting and by inclining to sins. And so, when they are already in sin, they work in the darkness of sin, lest they see: “Darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God” (Eph. 4:18). In the third way thus: God has the nature of the ultimate end and fulfillment of the desires of every creature. Hence, whatever a person assigns to himself as an ultimate end in which his desire rests, can be called his god. Hence, when you have pleasure as end, pleasure is called your god, and the same for pleasures of the flesh and for honors. Then it is explained so that the god of this world, i.e., that which men living in a worldly way set up as their end, say pleasure or riches and the like. And God blinds their minds, inasmuch as he prevents them from seeing the light of grace here, and the light of glory in the future: “Fire”, namely of concupiscence, “has fallen on them, and they shall not see the sun” (Ps. 57:9, Vulgate). Thus, therefore, the blindness of unbelievers is not on the part of the Gospel, but from the sin of unbelievers.

125. – Therefore, he adds, to keep them from seeing the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ. Here it should be noted that God the Father is the source of all light: “God is light and in him is no darkness at all” (1 Jn. 1:5). From this fountain of light is derived the image of this light, namely the Son, the Word of God: “He reflects the glory of God and bears the very stamp of his nature” (Heb. 1:3). Therefore, this brightness of glory and image of the fountain of light took our flesh and accomplished many glorious and divine works in this world. The disclosing of this light is the Gospel. Hence, the Gospel is also called the knowledge of the glory of Christ, which knowledge has the power to enlighten: “Wisdom is radiant and unfading” (Wis. 6:12). As far as it is concerned, it shines upon all and enlightens all. But those who place an obstacle are not enlightened. And this is what he says: the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, to keep them from seeing, namely, with their unbelieving minds, the light of the gospel, which enlightens because it is the glory of Christ, i.e. his brightness: “We have beheld his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father” (Jn. 1:14). This glory is Christ’s, inasmuch as he is the likeness [image] of God: “He is the image of the invisible God” (Col. 1:15).

126. – Note, according to a Gloss, that Christ is the most perfect image of God. For in order that something be perfectly an image of something, three things are necessary, and these three are perfectly in Christ. First, a likeness; second, origin; third, perfect equality. For if there is unlikeness between the image and that of which it is the image, and one does not arise from the other, or even if there is not perfect equality according to the same nature, then the notion of perfect image would not be there. For the likeness of a king on a coin is not called a perfect image of the king, because equality according to the same nature is lacking; but the likeness of a king in his son is called a perfect image of the king, because it possesses the three marks mentioned Therefore, since those three are present in Christ, the Son of God, because namely he is similar to the Father, arises from the Father and is equal to the Father, he is in the highest degree and perfectly called the image of God.

127. – Then when he says, For what we preach is not ourselves, the Apostle settles a doubt. For some could say to the Apostle, contrary to what was said here: above you said that your Gospel was hidden; now you say that the Gospel of Christ enlightens. Therefore, if it is granted that the Gospel of Christ enlightens, it cannot follow that your Gospel is hidden. To settle this he does two things. First he shows that his own Gospel and Christ’s are the same; secondly, he shows how it is that his own Gospel enlightens (v. 6)

128. – He says, therefore: I say that the manifestation of the brightness of Christ is the Gospel of Christ and our Gospel. It is ours as preached by us; it is Christ’s truly as the one preached in the Gospel. Hence it is that what we preach is not ourselves, i.e., we do not commend ourselves nor for ourselves, i.e., we do not use our preaching for our praise or gain, but we refer it all to Christ and his praise: “We preach Christ crucified” (1 Cor. 1:23); “That I may tell of all your works,” not mine, “in the gates of the daughter of Zion” (Ps. 73:28). But Jesus Christ as Lord, with ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake. As if to say: we preach Jesus as Lord, but ourselves as servants, the reason being that we principally seek the praise of Christ and not our own. For a servant is one who exists for the profit of the master. That is why a minister of the Church, who does not seek the honor of God and the welfare of his subjects, is not a true ruler, but a tyrant. For whoever rules well should be as a servant seeking the honor and profit of his subjects: “The elder shall serve the younger” (Gen. 25:23); “For though I am free from all men, I have made myself a slave to all” (1 Cor. 9:19).

129. – Then when he says, For it is the God who said, he shows the source of his Gospel’s power to enlighten. Here we should note the order of the Apostle’s procedure. It is this: at one time, namely, before being converted to Christ, we were darkness, just as you and the others, upon whom the brightness of Christ’s glory did not shine. But now, after Christ has called us to himself by his grace, that darkness has been taken away from us, and now the power of the glory of Christ’s brightness shines in us, and it shines on us in such a way that not only are we enlightened so that we can see, but we enlighten others. Therefore, from the spiritual grace and abundant splendor of the brightness of the glory of Christ in us, our Gospel has the power to enlighten.

130. – And this is what he says: I say that our Gospel enlightens, for it is the God who said, i.e., who made by a single command, let light shine out of darkness, by separating the elements, when he enlightened the dark chaos by the light he made: “He said, ‘let there be light’” (Gen. 1:3): “I made an unfailing light to rise in the heavens” (Sir 24:6). He, I say, has shone in our hearts, i.e., in our minds, previously darkened by the absence of the light of grace and by the obscurity of sin: “To enlighten those that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death” (Lk. 1:79). He has shone, I say, not only to enlighten us, but to give the light, i.e., that we might enlighten others: “To me, though I am the very least of all the saints, this grace was given” (Eph. 3:8); “You are the light of the world” (Matt. 5:4). To give the light, I say, of the knowledge, i.e., that we make others know of the glory of God, i.e., of the clear vision of God, in the face of Christ. A Gloss: i.e., “through Jesus Christ”, who is the face of the Father, because without him the Father is not known. But it is said better thus: to illumine the holy brightness of God, which indeed shines in the face of Jesus Christ, i.e., so that by that glory and brightness Jesus Christ may be known. As if to say: in summary, God has shone upon us to enlighten us, so that Jesus Christ may be known and preached among the Gentiles.
