# Chapter 5, Lecture 3

> 11 Therefore, knowing the fear of the Lord, we persuade men; but what we are is known to God, and I hope it is known also to your conscience. 12 We are not commending ourselves to you again but giving you cause to be proud of us, so that you may be able to answer those who pride themselves on a man’s position and not on his heart. 13 For if we are beside ourselves, it is for God; if we are in our right mind, it is for you. 14 For the love of Christ controls us, because we are convinced that one has died for all; therefore all have died. 15 And he died for all, that those who live might live no longer for themselves but for him who for their sake died and was raised.

173. – Having shown how the saints prepare themselves for the reward of eternal glory by pleasing God, the Apostle now shows how they prepare themselves for this by helping their neighbor. In regard to this he does two things. First, he shows his own solicitude for the salvation of his neighbor; secondly, he assigns the cause of this solicitude (v. 14). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he mentions the care he has for the salvation of his neighbor by persuading them; secondly, he excludes a false opinion (v. 12); thirdly, he shows that even in the way he teaches he intends the welfare of his neighbor (v. 13). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he mentions his zeal to benefit his neighbor; secondly, he explains this (v. 11b).

174. – He says therefore: I say that we must be manifested before the tribunal of Christ, and this consideration induces men to fear the judgment. Hence, he says, therefore, knowing the fear of the Lord, i.e., how purely and chastely the Lord Jesus should be feared, we persuade men to fear and believe: “When I consider, I am in dread of him” (Job 23:15); “Who would not fear you, O King of the nations” (Jer. 10:7); “But the LORD of hosts, him you shall regard as holy; let him be your fear, and let him be your dread” (Is. 8:13).

175. – But because someone could say that it is not from a good conscience, but for his own advantage that he persuades men, he shows that this is false by appealing to two testimonies, namely, of God, when he says, but what we are is known to God, i.e., that he is speaking from fear of God, for God sees the intention of our heart: “The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately corrupt; who can understand it? I the LORD search the mind and try the heart” (Jer. 17:9-10); “For he himself knew what was in man” (Jn. 2:25). And by the testimony of their consciences; hence he says, I hope it is known also to your conscience. Truly I hope, because I have shown myself to you in such a way that you might know we are approved and might firmly hold this, even though you do not admit it by mouth: “Commending ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God” (2 Cor. 4:2)

176. – Then because they might suppose that the Apostle said this to commend himself, he removes this false supposition, saying, we are not commending ourselves to you again, i.e., we are not saying this for our commendation, as though trying to commend ourselves again. For above (in chapter three and in 1 Corinthians 3) he said certain things for his commendation: “For it is not the man who commends himself that is accepted, but the man whom the Lord commends” (2 Cor. 10:18). But we say this for your benefit. As if to say, but giving you cause to be proud of us, i.e., matter for glorifying. For the false apostles took glory in elation, saying that they were taught by the apostles, who were from the Lord, namely, by Peter and James, who were pillars of the faith, thus detracting from the Apostle, as though he had not been with the Lord Jesus, and wishing to destroy his teaching. Therefore, in order that the Corinthians, too, might have something in which to glory against those false apostles, namely, the grace given to the Apostle, so as to refute them and not be seduced by them, he said this. Hence, he continues, so that you may be able to answer those, i.e., against them, or to those reprimanding, what you can speak.

177. – To them, I say, who pride themselves on a man’s position and not on his heart [who glory in face and not in heart]. This can be explained in three ways. First, they glory in face, i.e., in the external observances of the Law, because that is what they taught, and not in heart, i.e., in the virtue of Christ, which is in the heart, unlike the Apostle, who in virtue of the cross of Christ, said: “Far be it from me to glory except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ” (Gal. 6:14). Likewise they glory in face, i.e., in the presence of men, as hypocrites do, and not in heart, i.e., in the testimony of conscience, as the Apostle says above (2 Cor. 1:12): “For our boast is this, the testimony of our conscience.” Or they glory in face, because they pretend some things outwardly, which they do not feel in the heart, namely, that they claimed to have been instructed by the apostles and were following their doctrine, which on the contrary they were trying to destroy. It is clear, therefore, how the Apostle procured the salvation of his neighbor by teaching.

178. – Now we must see how he procured their salvation even in the way he taught. Hence he says, for if we are beside ourselves, it is for God; if we are in our right mind [if we are sober], it is for you. This is explained in two ways: in one way so that the Apostle calls himself transported when he speaks to them by commending himself, and sober when he is not speaking of his own commendation. According to this he is saying: no matter how we teach, it is either for the honor of God or the benefit of his neighbor; for if we are beside ourselves, i.e., commend ourselves, it is for God, i.e., for the honor of God or for observing God’s judgment; if we are in our right mind [if we are sober], i.e., not saying great things about ourselves, this is for you, i.e., for your profit.

179. – But there is another and more literal sense. I say that we give you opportunity for glorying in us, because in everything we do and even in the way we do it, we intend your good. Hence it should be noted that the apostles were midway between God and the people: “While I stood between the Lord and you at that time” (Deut. 5:5). Therefore, they were required to draw from God whatever they poured out upon the people. Hence it was necessary that sometimes they raised themselves to God by contemplation to obtain heavenly things, and sometimes conformed themselves to the people to deliver what they had received from God; and all this tended to their profit. Hence he says, for if we are beside ourselves, i.e., raised to the state of receiving gifts of graces, and this in order to be united to God, which is done by means of temporal things: “I said in my vision” (Ps. 116:11, Vulgate); Dionysius: “Divine love causes ecstasy.” If we are in our right mind, i.e., adapt ourselves to you by delivering God’s precepts, it is for you, i.e., for your benefit. This sobriety is not opposed to inebriation in wine, which brings wars on earth, but to that inebriation which is from the Holy Spirit and draws men to divine things and about which Song of Songs (5:1) says: “Eat, O friends, and drink: drink deeply, O lovers!” For that sobriety is for the benefit of our neighbor, but the inebriation is for the love of God. Such a descent was signified by the descent of the angels on the ladder which Jacob saw (Gen. 28:12): “You will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man” (Jn. 1:51).

180. – Then when he says, For the love of Christ, the Apostle indicates the cause of his solicitude, namely, the love of Christ. In regard to this he does two things. First, he shows that he is pressed by the charity of Christ to procure the salvation of his neighbor; secondly, he indicates the source from which the charity of Christ is kindled (v. 14b).

181. – He says, therefore: I say that whether we be beside ourselves, it is for God; or whether we be sober, it is for you, i.e., for your benefit. The reason for this is that the love of Christ controls [presses] us to this. He says, presses, because it is the same as stimulates. As if to say: the love of God, as a goad, stimulates us to do what charity commands, namely, to procure the salvation of our neighbor: “Those who are led,” i.e., stirred, “by the Spirit of God are sons of God” (Rom. 8:14); “Its flashes are flashes of fire” (Song 8:6).

182. – Then he indicates the cause of his solicitude, namely, the love of Christ, adding, because we are convinced that one has died for all. First, he assigns the reason for this; secondly, he explains it (v. 15).

183. – He says, therefore: I say that we do all things for you, because the love of Christ controls us, because we are convinced that one, namely Christ, has died for all, then we ourselves should so live, i.e., for your benefit, that we are even dead to ourselves, i.e., we care nothing about ourselves, but about Christ and the things of Christ: “God shows his love for us” (Rom. 5:8); “Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps” (1 Pet. 2:21).

184. – What follows from this, namely, therefore all have died, is explained in three ways. First, as if to say that all have died with the death of sin in Adam. For it would not have been necessary for Christ to suffer for all, if all were not dead with the death of Adam’s sin: “For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive” (1 Cor. 15:22). Secondly, as if to say: all have died, namely, to the old life. For Christ died to remove sins; therefore, all should die to the old life, namely, of sin, and live the life of justice: “The death he died he died to sin, once for all, but the life he lives he lives to God. So you also must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus” (Rom. 6:10-11). Thirdly, and more literally, all have died, i.e., each person should regard himself as though dead to himself: “You have died and your life is hid with Christ in God” (Col. 3:3).

185. – He explains this interpretation when he says, and he died for all: “He died that we might live to Christ” (see 2 Cor. 5:15; 1 Th. 5:10; 1 Jn. 4:9)). Hence he continues, that those who live might live, namely, with a natural life, no longer for themselves, i.e., solely for themselves and their own good, but for him who for their sake died and was raised, namely, for Christ, i.e., he should direct his whole life to the service and honor of Christ: “It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me” (Gal. 2:20); “Forget not the kindness of your surety, for he has given his life for you” (Sir. 29:20, Vulgate). The reason for these things is that everyone who acts takes the rule of his work from the end. Hence, if Christ is the end of our life, we should regulate our life not according to our will but according to Christ’s will. For this is what Christ himself said: “For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me” (Jn. 6:38)

186. – But note that he says two things, namely that Christ died and that he rose for us; wherein two things are required of us. For since he dies for us, we, too, should die to ourselves, i.e., deny ourselves for him: “If any man would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me” (Lk. 9:23). This is the same as saying: let him die to himself. But because Christ rose for us, we should so die to sin and to the old life and to ourselves that we might rise to the new life of Christ: “So that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life” (Rom. 6:4). This is why the Lord not only said, “Let him deny himself and take up his cross,” but added, “and follow me,” namely, in newness of life, by advancing in the virtues: “They shall go from virtue to virtue” (Ps. 84:7, Vulgate).
