# Chapter 4, Lecture 3

7 But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, to show that the transcendent power belongs to God and not to us. 8 We are afflicted in every way, but not crushed; perplexed, but not driven to despair; 9 persecuted, but not forsaken; struck down, but not destroyed; 10 always carrying in the body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our bodies.

131. – Above, he discussed the use of the ministry of the New Testament in regard to doing good; here he discusses its use in regard to enduring evil. In regard to this he does two things: first, he points to the endurance of the evils they suffered; secondly, he explains this (v. 11). In regard to the first he does three things: first, he shows the reason why they are exposed to tribulations by God; secondly, he shows that they should act patiently under these tribulations (v. 8); thirdly, he gives the reason for this patience (v. 10).

132. – He says, therefore: God has shone on our minds to give light to others, and this light is our greatest treasure: “It is an unfailing treasure for men” (Wis. 7:14); “Abundance of salvation, wisdom and knowledge” (Is. 33:6). But we do not have that greatest treasure in a precious place, but in a lowly fragile thing, in order that its power may be attributed to God. Hence, he says, We have this treasure, i.e., that light by which we enlighten others, in earthen vessels, i.e., in our frail and lowly body: “For he knows our frame; he remembers that we are dust” (Ps. 103:14); “Like the clay in the potter’s hand, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel” (Jer. 18:6); “Yet, O Lord, you are our Father, we are the clay” (Is. 64:8). Therefore we have it in earthen vessels to show that the transcendent power of that light belongs to God, i.e., attributed to God, and not believed to belong to us. For if we were rich or powerful or noble according to the flesh, any great good we did would be attributed not to God but to ourselves. But now, because we are poor and contemptible, such excellence is attributed to God and not to ourselves. Therefore, God wants us to be held in contempt and to be exposed to tribulations: “Lest they should say, ‘Our hand is triumphant, the Lord has not wrought all this’” (Deut. 32:27); “That no human being might boast in the presence of God” (1 Cor. 1:29); “You sent them as your forerunners not to speak” (Wis. 12:8).

133. – Then when he says, we are afflicted in every way, he shows their patience in the things they suffer. In regard to this he does two things: first, he points out the evils they suffer in general; secondly, he mentions them in particular (v. 8b).

134. – He says, therefore: truly we have this treasure in earthen vessels, because we are afflicted in every way. As if to say: no type of tribulation has missed us: “Through many tribulations we must enter the kingdom of God” (Ac. 14:22). Nor is this strange, for it says in Luke (24:26): “Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things and enter into his glory?” And although we suffer in this way, we are not crushed. He speaks as a traveler who becomes distressed, when he cannot find a way out of a narrow place. As if to say: men who trust only in the world are distressed, if they are troubled on all sides by the world, because no way of relief is open to them, since they trust only in the world. But we, although we are troubled in the world, yet because we trust in God and hope in Christ, escape by the help of God. That is why we are not distressed.

135. – Then when he says, perplexed, but not driven to despair, he lists the tribulations in particular. Now there are four things by which men are wont to be troubled; and the apostles were also troubled by them, namely, by external things, by the disquiet of their state, by injury to their reputation, and by affliction of their body. Therefore, in regard to the first he says, we are perplexed, i.e., impoverished. As if to say: we are so poor that we lack necessities: “To the present hour we hunger and thirst” (1 Cor. 4:11). But we are not driven to despair, i.e., abandoned by God, who is our treasure. For riches are no sought for their own sake, but for a sufficiency of life. Hence, men who live without God’s help and without hope, are destitute, if they lack riches. But those who trust and hope in God alone, no matter how perplexed they be, are not destitute: “As having nothing and possessing everything” (2 Cor. 6:10). But this is not all, for along with this we are disquieted: persecuted, namely, from place to place: “When they persecute you in one town, flee to the next” (Matt. 10:23), but not forsaken by God, because he offers help: “I will never fail you nor forsake you” (Heb. 13:5): “You, O Lord, have not forsaken those who seek you” (Ps. 9:10). Along with this we are injured in our reputation, because we are humiliated, i.e., scorned and regarded as nothing: “The hour is coming when whoever kills you will think he is offering service to God” (Jn. 16:2); “Blessed are you when men hate you” (Lk. 6:22). But because when a man is scorned and there is reason for it, the scorned one is usually ashamed. But when there is not cause, he is not ashamed. And there was no reason for their being scorned, hence he continues, but not ashamed. As if to say: since there is no reason, we do not care: “In you, O Lord, have I hoped; let me never be put to shame” (Ps. 31:2). But as though these were trifles, he adds to the amount of tribulation, saying: struck down into the dangers of death, but not destroyed, i.e., we do not cease doing good; or we are not destroyed because God sustains us: “We have become, and are now, as the refuse of the world, the offscouring of all things” (1 Cor. 4:13); “When you shall think yourself consumed, you shall rise as the daystar” (Job 11:17, Vulgate); “We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter” (Ps. 44:22).

136. – Then when he says, always carrying in the body the death of Jesus, he gives the reason for this patience. Here it should be noted that in Christ the process was this: having from the beginning of his conception a flesh that could suffer, he both suffered and died, yet within he was leading a spiritual life. But after the resurrection that spiritual and glorious life flowed into the body, so that his body became glorious and immortal, because “Christ being raised from the dead will never die again” (Rom. 6:9). Hence we can think of two states in the body of Christ, namely, of death and of glory. Hence, he says that we endure the perils of death and suffering patiently, in order to attain to the glorious life.

137. – And this is what he says: always carrying, i.e., in all things and everywhere, the death of Jesus, i.e., for Jesus, or in the likeness of Jesus’ death: “I bear on my body the marks of Jesus” (Gal. 6:19), because we have suffered for the truth, as Jesus did. In our body, not only in our mind: “For your sake we are slain all the day long” (Ps. 44:23). That the life of Jesus, i.e., the life of grace which Jesus gives, or the life of glory which Jesus reached by his sufferings: “Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things and enter into his glory?” (Lk. 24:26), may also be manifested, i.e., be evident even to enemies. He says therefore, in the future, namely, in the resurrection, or even now the life of grace, in our bodies, and not only in our souls: “When they had broken the wine jars, the lamps appeared” (cf. Jdg. 7:20). Therefore Ambrose says: “They did not fear to die on account of the promised resurrection.” Bearing about, i.e., carrying it about and enduring, because wherever we go, we suffer and do not give up. And this so that the life of Jesus, which is now hidden in our hearts, may be manifested in our bodies, namely, when “He will change our lowly body to be like his glorious body” (Phil. 3:21); “You have died and your life is hid with Christ in God” (Col. 3:3); “If we die with him, we shall also live with him” (2 Tim. 2:11).
