# Chapter 7, Lecture 3

> 9b For you felt a godly grief, so that you suffered no loss through us. 10 For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation and brings no regret, but worldly grief produces death. 11 For see what earnestness this godly grief has produced in you, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what alarm, what longing, what zeal, what punishment! At every point you have proved yourselves guiltless in the matter.

265. – Having mentioned the comfort the Apostle and Titus experienced at the grief of the Corinthians, because it ended in repentance and not in despair, he now gives the reason for his comfort by commending their sorrow. In regard to this he does two things. First, he commends their sorrow; secondly, from this he concludes to his intent (v. 12). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he commends their sorrow on the part of its cause; secondly, on the part of its effect (v. 10).

266. – The cause on account of which he commends their sorrow is that it was according to God. Therefore he says: although for a time I was sorry for the epistle, nevertheless I rejoice now, for you felt a godly grief. Here it should be noted that sorrow and joy and generally every emotion arise from love; for a person is sad when he lacks what he loves. The kind of love determines the kind of sorrow it causes. But there are two kinds of love: one by which God is loved, and from this arises a sorrow which is according to God; the other is that by which the world is loved, and from this arises a worldly sorrow. The love by which we love God makes us serve him gladly, honor him carefully and set some time apart for God joyfully. But because sin hinders us from serving God, we devote no time to him or seek his honor, the love of God causes sorrow for sin: and this is sorrow according to God. This sorrow was not in you to produce evil and loss, but fruit and merit. Hence, he says, that you suffered no loss through us, because you profit not only from the good and pleasant things we bestow on you, but also from the fact that we correct and sadden you: “For the moment all discipline seems painful rather than pleasant; later it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it” (Heb. 12:11).

267. – The when he says, For godly grief, he commends their sorrow because of its effect, which is the reward of eternal life. In regard to this he does two things. First, he mentions the effect in general; secondly, what their experience teaches (v. 11). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he mentions the effect of sorrow which is according to God; secondly, of sorrow which is according to the world (v. 10b).

268. – He says therefore: I say that our sorrow was not a loss for you, i.e., for godly grief produces a repentance, I say, that leads to salvation, i.e., eternal salvation, which is a steadfast salvation belonging to the blessed: “But my salvation will be for ever, and my deliverance will never be ended” (Is. 51:6); and this is the work of penance: “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand” (Matt. 3:2). He says, steadfast, to exclude temporal, which is transitory and common to men and beasts: “Man and beasts you save, O Lord” (Ps. 35:8).

269. – But against what he says, that sadness which is according to God works penance, it seems that the very sorrow according to God is penance. For penance is sorrow over evil and is according to God. Therefore it does not work penance. I answer that penance has three parts, the first of which is sorrow, namely grief and compunction over sins; the other two are confession and satisfaction. Therefore, when he says that sorrow works penance, it is to be understood that compunction or sorrow for sin works penance in us, i.e., the other parts of penance, namely, confession and satisfaction. Or we might say that sorrow according to God is more common than penance, because penance is about one’s own sins, but one sorrows according to God for his own sins and those of others. Thus, therefore, the effect of sorrow according to God is eternal salvation, but the effect of sorrow according to the world is death. For since a person who loves the world is made an enemy of God, as it says in Jas. (4:4), the love of the world causes death. For a person is sorrowful according to the world, not because he offended God by sin, but because, being caught in his sin, he is punished for it and exposed; and this sadness should be avoided in sins (Sir. 30:24, Vulgate).

270. – Then (v. 11) he explains this effect from the experience learned from them. As if to say: a truly steadfast salvation, because it is clear from experience that it works in us many things that lead to salvation. He mentions six of these things, one of which is general, namely, carefulness. For when a person is free of care, it is easy for him to become negligent; but when he is sad and fearful, he is careful. Hence he says, For see, i.e., you have experienced in your own case, what earnestness this godly grief has produced in you to avoid evil and to do good: “He has shown you, O man, what is good” (Mic. 6:8); and then, “walk carefully with your God.”

271. – The other five are special: some pertain to internal feeling and some to external action. Of those that pertain to inward feeling, some are for the removal of sin, and some for the attainment of good. For a true penitent should depart from evil and do good. In regard to the removal of evil he lists three, the first of which is to desist from evil; as to this he says, what eagerness to clear yourselves, against those who induce us to evil: “Resist him, firm in your faith” (1 Pet. 5:9). Or according to a Gloss, to defend me against the false apostle: “Take the whole armor of God” (Eph. 6:13). The second is that a man be indignant against himself for the sins he has committed; as to this he says, what indignation. For indignation at oneself works sorrow according to God: “And my wrath upheld me” (Is. 63:5). The third is that he live in continual fear of the future, so as to be wary; as to this he says, what alarm at falling again, namely, that the same thing might happen in the future: “The fear of God came upon all” (Sir. 25:14, Vulgate). As to the attainment of good he lists two things. The first is desire for what is good; as to this he says, what longing [desire], by which a man is inclined to do good: “The desire of the righteous ends only in good” (Prov. 11:23). Secondly, good rivalry, by which one strives to imitate those who are good; as to this he says, what zeal to imitate me and other good men: “But earnestly desire the higher gifts” (1 Cor. 12:31)

272. – Of those which pertain to outward action he mentions two. The first is that they take revenge on themselves for having sinned; and this is useful. For since every evil must be punished either by man or by God, if he [God] does not punish here, it is better that a man punish in himself the evil that he has done than that God do it, because as it says in Heb. (10:31): “It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” As to this he says, what punishment, i.e., because you punish sinners and even yourselves: “But I pommel my body and subdue it, lest after preaching to others I myself should be disqualified” (1 Cor. 9:27); (Is. 26:18). The second is that he refrain from sin altogether; hence he says, At every point you have proved yourselves, namely, with faith leading you, guiltless in the matter, i.e., of being a Christian: “But as servants of God we commend ourselves in every way” (2 Cor. 6:4); “He chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him” (Eph. 1:4); “He who walks in the way that is blameless shall minister to me” (Ps. 101:6). Or in the matter about which you were corrected, for the favor you did for the fornicator; but later by punishing and condemning him you showed that you were undefiled in this.
