# Chapter 6, Lecture 2

6 By purity, knowledge, forbearance, kindness, the Holy Spirit, genuine love, 7 truthful speech, and the power of God; with the weapons of righteousness for the right hand and for the left; 8 in honor and dishonor, in ill repute and good repute. We are treated as impostors, and yet are true; 9 as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold we live; as punished, and yet not killed; 10 as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing everything.

216. – Having set down the things which pertain to enduring evils, he now mentions those which pertain to the observance of good. Now the goodness of a work consists in three things, namely, in the perfection of virtues, and this pertains to the heart; in speaking the truth, and this pertains to the mouth; and in the virtuous activity which pertains to a work. First, therefore, the Apostle shows how they conduct themselves in matters pertaining to the perfection of the virtues, which consists in the heart; secondly, in those which pertain to the virtue of the mouth (v. 7); thirdly, in those which pertain to the perfection of a work (v. 7b).

217. – In regard to the first he sets down four virtues: first of all the virtue of chastity, which holds a prominent place in the virtue of temperance: in regard to this he says, in purity [chastity], namely, of mind and body. Here it should be noted that immediately after many labours, watches and fasts he mentions chastity, because a person who wills to have the virtue of chastity must be given to labours, continue in watchings, and be worn out with fasts: “But I pommel my body and subdue it, lest after preaching to others I myself should be disqualified” (1 Cor. 9:27); “Strive for peace with all men, and for the holiness without which no one will see the Lord” (Heb. 12:14). But if anyone should ask why he makes no mention of the other virtues, but only of temperance, the answer is that he does mention them implicitly, because when he says, “in much patience, in tribulations” (v. 4), they pertain to the virtue of courage; when he says, “by the armor of justice” (v. 7), there is reference to the virtue of justice.

218. – Secondly, he mentions the virtue of knowledge; therefore he says, in knowledge. If this is taken as referring to the knowledge by which a person knows how to behave well in the midst of a wicked and perverse nation, it pertains to the virtue of prudence. But if knowledge is taken as referring to the certitude with which the faithful are certain about the things which pertain to their knowledge of God, it pertains to the virtue of faith. Both are necessary for Christians, for without prudence and faith, men easily slip into sins: “Therefore my people go into exile for want of knowledge” (Is. 5:13); “And I will give you shepherds after my own heart” (Jer. 3:15).

219. – Thirdly, he mentions the virtue of hope when he says, longsuffering, which pertains to the perfection of hope. For a longsuffering person is nothing less than a person who is always hopeful of obtaining a good that is difficult and waits patiently if it delay; and this is by the Holy Spirit: “But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control” (Gal. 5:22-23); “For all endurance and patience with joy” (Col. 1:11).

220. – Fourthly, he mentions charity, which has two effects, namely, one inward and one outward. In the inward effect it has sweetness toward one’s neighbor: for it is unseemly for a person not to be sweet toward those he loves; therefore he says, in kindness [sweetness], in our behavior toward others, and gentle: “A pleasant voice multiplies friends, and a gracious tongue multiplies courtesies” (Sir. 6:5). Not in the sweetness of the world, but in that which is caused by the love of God, i.e., by the Holy Spirit; hence he says, in the Holy Spirit, i.e., which the Holy Spirit causes in us: “O how good and sweet is your Spirit, Lord, in all things” (Wis. 12:1, Vulgate). In the outward effect it has truth without pretense, i.e., that a person not pretend outwardly the contrary of what he has within; hence he says, in genuine love: “Let us not love in word or speech but in deed and in truth” (1 Jn. 3:18); “And above all these put on love” (Col. 3:14). The reason for this is because, as it says in Wis. (1:5): “For the Holy Spirit of discipline will flee from deceit.”

221. – Then he shows how they should act in things which pertain to the truth of the mouth, namely, that they be truthful. Hence, he says, truthful speech, namely, speaking and preaching what is true.

222. – But how they should act in regard to the perfection of a work, he tells them when he says, in the power of God, i.e., in let us not put confidence in our own works, but only in the power of God: “For the kingdom of God does not consist in talk but in power” (1 Cor. 4:20).

223. – Then when he says, with the weapons of righteousness, he shows how they should act in doing good in prosperity and adversity; and this pertains to the virtue of justice. First, he shows this in general; secondly, he explains it in particular. He says therefore, that we should show ourselves as God’s ministers in much patience and what is more with the weapons of righteousness [by the armor of justice]. Here it should be noted that justice ordains and makes a man keep his place for the right hand, i.e., in prosperity, namely, that he not be lifted up; and for the left hand, i.e., in adversity, namely, that he not be cast down: “In any and all circumstances I have learned the secret of facing plenty and hunger, abundance and want” (Phil. 4:12). Then he explains this by the two sides, prosperity and adversity, saying, in honor and dishonor. Here it should be noted that in temporal affairs prosperity and adversity consist in three things, namely, the pride of life, in the concupiscence of the flesh, and in the concupiscence of the eyes: “For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh and the lust of the eyes and the pride of life, is not of the Father but is of the world” (1 Jn. 2:16). He treats these in order. First, he shows how they should act in prosperity and adversity as pertaining to the pride of life; secondly, in things which pertain to the concupiscence of the flesh (v. 9); thirdly, pertaining to the concupiscence of the eyes (v. 10b).

224. – Now there are two things which pertain to pride, namely, excellence of state and of works. Hence he says, in honor, i.e., by a condition of excellence. As if to say: let us show ourselves as God’s ministers, namely, by the glory of God, that is, in prosperity: “The LORD of hosts has purposed it, to defile the pride of all glory” (Is. 23:9). That the apostles seemed glorious is shown in Acts (chap. 14), when Paul and Barnabas were taken as gods. And dishonor, which is on the left. As if to say: let us neither be lifted up by glory nor, if we are contemptible, be cast down: “God chose what is low and despised in the world, even things that are not, to bring to nothing things that are” (1 Cor. 1:28). As to reports about works, he says, in ill repute and good repute. Here it should be noted that, as Gregory says, a man should not be the cause of his own bad reputation among those who are outside; rather he should try to acquire a good reputation, as Sir. (41:15) says: “Better is the man who hides his folly than the man who hides his wisdom,” and this for the sake of others, because we need to have a good reputation among those who are outside (1 Tim. 3:7). But if anyone happens to fall into bad repute unjustly, he should not be fainthearted or abandon holiness on that account. But if he has a good reputation among unbelievers, he should not be proud but take a middle path between the two. Then he explains the two things he mentioned. First, the evil reputation they had and to what a degree. Hence he says, as imposters and yet true. As if to say: some regard us as deceivers and some as honest. But this is not strange, because even in the case of Christ some said that he was good, and some that he was not, but that he was deceiving the multitude, as it says in Jn. (7:12). Secondly, he shows how they were noble and ignoble. Hence he says, as unknown and yet well known, i.e., approved by the good and unknown, i.e., despised by the evil: “We have become, and are now, as the refuse of the world, the offscouring of all things” (1 Cor. 4:13).

225. – Then he discusses the things which pertain to the concupiscence of the flesh and mentions three things which the flesh desires: first, it desires a long life; as to this he says, as dying, i.e., although we are exposed to the dangers of death: “And often near death” (2 Cor. 11:23), and behold we live in virtue and faith. Therefore, Hab. (2:4) says: “But the righteous live by their faith”; “I shall not die, but I shall live” (Ps. 118:17). Secondly, it desires health and repose; as to this he says, as punished and yet not killed. As if to say: although we are chastised with many stripes by the Lord, yet he has not delivered us over to death: “The Lord has chastened me sorely, but he has not given me over to death” (Ps. 118:13); “Indeed all who desire to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted” (2 Tim. 3:12). Thirdly, it desires joy and pleasantness; as to this he says, as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. For although in outward things and things which pertain to the flesh, we suffer sadness and bitterness, yet inwardly we have continual joy, which grows in us by the consolations of the Holy Spirit and by the hope of an eternal reward: “Count it all joy, my brethren, when you meet various trials” (Jas. 1:2); “You will have pain, but your pain will turn into joy” (Jn. 16:20).

226. – Then he discusses the things which pertain to the concupiscence of the eyes, and in regard to this he mentions two things. One of these is in relation to others, and according to this the right hand in riches consists in a man abounding, so that he can minister to others from his riches. But the left hand consists in a man’s being so poor that he must beg from others. Hence he says that in these temporal things we are as poor, i.e., receiving from others; but as to spiritual things, yet making many rich. He does not say, “all,” because not all are ready to be enriched: “Another pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth” (Prov. 13:7). The second is in relation to themselves, and according to this, prosperity in riches is to possess many; but the left side is that he have absolutely nothing. In regard to this he says that in external things they are as having nothing, namely, in temporal things, because they have forsaken all things for Christ: “If you would be perfect, go, sell what you possess and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven” (Matt. 19:21). But inwardly and in spiritual things, possessing all things, namely, by an inner greatness of heart. And this is so because they lived not for themselves, but for Christ. Consequently, all that were Christ’s they regarded as their own. Hence, since all things are subject to Christ, they possessed all things, and all things tended to their glory: “Every place that the sole of your foot will tread upon I have given to you” (Jos. 1:3).

227. – Note in regard to the foregoing that the Apostle employs a remarkable manner of speaking. For he, as it were, always sets one thing against another, and temporal against spiritual. But yet in temporal things he always adds a condition, namely, as or as though, but in the opposite spiritual things he adds nothing. The reason for this is that temporal things, whether they be good or evil, are changeable and apparent, and they have only a likeness to good and evil. Hence he says, as imposters and as unknown, because they were not so in reality, but only in men’s opinion. Consequently, they were transitory good or evils. But spiritual goods are existent and true; therefore, he adds no condition to them.
