# Chapter 5, Lecture 2

> 5 He who has prepared us for this very thing is God, who has given us the Spirit as a guarantee. 6 So we are always of good courage; we know that while we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord, 7 for we walk by faith, not by sight. 8 We are of good courage, and we would rather be away from the body and at home with the Lord. 9 So whether we are at home or away, we make it our aim to please him. 10 For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may receive good or evil, according to what he has done in the body.

160. – Here he discloses the author of the supernatural desire for a heavenly dwelling. For the cause of a natural desire that we be not despoiled is that the soul is naturally united to the body, and vice versa. But the desire to be clothed upon with a heavenly dwelling is not from nature but from God. Hence, he says, he who has prepared us for this very thing is God. As if to say: we wish to put on the heavenly dwelling, but in such a way as not to lose the earthly one. And yet it is God who effects in us the desire to be thus clothed over: “God is at work in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure” (Phil. 2:13). The reason for this is that upon every nature follows a desire suited to the end of that nature, as something heavy naturally tends downward and seeks to rest there. But if a thing’s desire is above its nature, that thing is not moved to that end naturally, but by something else, which is above its nature. Now it is evident that to enjoy eternal glory and to see God by his essence, although it is appropriate to a rational creature, is above its nature. Therefore, the rational creature is not moved to desire this by nature, but by God himself, who prepared us for this very thing.

161. – How this is accomplished he adds, saying, who has given us the Spirit as a guarantee [pledge]. In regard to this it should be noted that God produces natural desires and supernatural desires in us: the natural, when he gives us a natural spirit suited to human nature: “God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life” (Gen. 2:7); but he gives the supernatural desires when he infuses in us the supernatural spirit, i.e., the Holy Spirit. Therefore he says, who has given us the Spirit as a guarantee, i.e., the Holy Spirit producing in us the certainty of this thing, with which we desire to be filled: “You were sealed with the Holy Spirit, which is the guarantee of our inheritance” (Eph. 1:13-14). He says, pledge, because a pledge has as much value as the thing for which it is given; but it differs from the thing for which it is given in this way, namely, that the thing is possessed with a fuller right, when it is already had, than the pledge is. For the thing is possessed as one’s own, but the pledge is kept and held as though giving assurance that the thing will be possessed. So it is with the Holy Spirit: because the Holy Spirit has as much value as heavenly glory. But there is a difference in the way he is possessed, because now we have him as a surety of obtaining that glory; but in heaven we shall have him as something now possessed by us. For then we shall have him perfectly, but now imperfectly. In this way, therefore, is grace’s desire deferred by a natural desire.

162. – But is it hindered? No, but grace’s desire conquers. Hence, he says, so we are always of good courage, knowing that while we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord. As if to say: there are two desires in holy men, one by which they desire a heavenly dwelling, the other by which they do not wish to be despoiled. If these were compatible, they would not be contrary, and one would not be delayed by the other. But the Apostle shows that they are incompatible and that one must prevail over the other. In regard to this he does two three things: first, he shows the incompatibility of these desires; secondly, he enters a proof (v. 7); thirdly, he shows which of them conquers (v. 8).

163. –He shows their incompatibility when he says, so we are always of good courage [always daring], knowing that while we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord. Properly speaking, to dare is to involve oneself in dangers of death and not to yield through fear. But although the saints naturally fear death, yet they dare to face the dangers of death and not yield because of a fear of death: “The righteous are bold as a lion” (Prov. 28:1); “In his days he feared not the prince” (Sir. 48:13, Vulgate). Knowing this, namely, that he strengthens our boldness not to fear death for Christ, that while we are at home in the body we are away, i.e., far away from God: “Woe to me because my stay has been prolonged” (Ps. 120:5, Vulgate). We are absent inasmuch as we are outside our native land, which is God. Otherwise, we would not be described as away from him. And this is not from our nature, but from his grace.

164. – That we are absent from the Lord is proved, when he says, for we walk by faith, i.e., we pass through this life in faith, and not by sight: because faith deals with things not seen. For the word of faith is as a lamp with which the road is lit in this life: “Your word is a lamp to my feet, and a light for my steps” (Ps. 119:105). But in heaven there will be no such lamp, because the radiance of God, i.e., God himself, has enlightened it (Rev. 21:23). Therefore, we shall then see him by sight, i.e., in his essence. But he says, we walk by faith, because faith is concerned with things unseen: “Faith is the substance of things hoped for; the conviction of things not seen” (Heb. 11:1). But as long as the soul is united to the body, it does not see God in his essence: “No man shall see me and live” (Ex. 33:20). Hence, inasmuch as we assent by believing the things we do not see, we are said to walk by faith and not by sight. Thus, therefore, the incompatibility of the two desires is plain, because we cannot, along with this body, be clothed over by the heavenly habitation, the proof of this being that we walk by faith.

165. – He follows with the victory of the one desire, namely, of grace, when he says, we are of good courage and would rather be away from the body. This should be read as follows: knowing what was said above, i.e., that while we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord [we dare and have a good will]. He says two things: one implies the repugnance he has in willing, a repugnance caused by the fear of death. For where there is no fear, there is no daring. For the fear of death springs from our nature’s desire, but the daring of grace’s desire. Therefore, he says, we dare. The other implies an imperfection of the soul in desiring, because unless we desired properly, the fear of death would not be overcome, since it is quite natural. Therefore, it is not only necessary to dare, but also to have a good will, i.e., to will gladly. For although, according to the Philosopher, in the act of courage, joy is not required for the perfection of the virtue as it is in the other virtues, but only not to be sad. Yet because the courage of the saints is more perfect, they are not only not sad at the dangers of death, but they rejoice: “My desire is to depart and be with Christ” (Phil. 1:23). But what do we dare? Rather to be away from the body, i.e., to be separated from the body by its dissolution, which is contrary to the desire of nature, and at home with the Lord, i.e., to walk by sight, which is the desire of grace. He desired this who said in Psalm 42 (v. 5): “My soul thirsts for God, for the living God.”

166. – Note that he concludes to the same two things he proposed at the beginning, namely, that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, which is the same as what he says here, namely, to be away from the body; and that we have a building from God, not made with human hands, in heaven, which is the same as being at home with the Lord.

167. – By these words is refuted the error of those who say that the souls of dead saints are not at once after death brought to the vision of God and into his presence, but they reside in mansions until the day of judgment. For the saints dared and desired in vain to be away from the body, if they would not be present to God when separated from the body. Therefore, the answer is that the saints see the essence of God immediately after death and dwell in a heavenly mansion. Thus, therefore, it is plain that the reward which the saints await is inestimable.

168. – He follows this with an account of the preparation for the reward which is accomplished by the struggle against temptations and by exercising good works (v. 9). But the saints are prepared for this reward in three ways. First, by pleasing God; secondly, by helping their neighbor (v. 11); thirdly, by removing carnal affections from themselves (v. 16).

169. – They please God by resisting evil. Hence he says, so, namely, because our whole desire is to be present with God, we contend, i.e., we make great effort, i.e., we strive and fight against the temptations of the devil, the flesh and the world: “Strive to enter by the narrow gate” (Lk. 13:24). To please him, namely, God, with whom we desire to be present, whether we are at home or away: because unless we strive to please him in this life, while we are absent, we shall not be able to please him or be present with him in the other life: “There was one who pleased God and was loved by him” (Wis. 4:10).

170. – Then when he says, For we must all appear, he adds the cause for why the saints strive to please God. This cause is taken from a consideration of the future judgment, when we must all be manifested. Here the Apostle mentions five marks of the future judgment. The first is its universality, because no one will be exempted from that judgment; hence he says, we must all, i.e., all men, good and bad, great and small: “So each of us shall give account of himself to God” (Rom. 14:12); “And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened” (Rev. 20:12).

171. – But there are two objections against this. First, because it does not seem that unbelievers will come to judgment, for one who does not believe has already been judged, as it says in John (3:18). Secondly, because some will be there as judges: “You who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel” (Matt. 19:28). Therefore, not all will be before the tribunal to be judged. I answer that there are two things in a judgment, namely, a discussion of merits, and as to this not all will be judged, because those who have completely renounced Satan and all him pomps, and have clung to Christ in all things, will not be judged, because they are gods already. But those who did not adhere to Christ in any way, neither by faith nor works, will also not need discussion. But those who have something with Christ, namely, faith, and in something have withdrawn from him, namely by evil works and wicked desires, will be discussed as to the things they committed against Christ. Hence, as to this, only sinful Christians will be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ. But sentence will also be pronounced during the judgment; and as to this, all will be manifested. But it seems that children will be exempt, because he says, so that each one may receive good or evil according to what he has done in the body. But children have done nothing in the body. This is answered by a Gloss [Lombard]: for they will not be judged for the things they did by themselves, but for the things they did through others, when they believed or did not believe, were baptized or not baptized through them. Or they will be condemned for the sin of their first parents.

172. – Secondly, he mentions the certainty of the judgment. For in human judgment many can be deceived, when they are judged evil, whereas they are good; or good, whereas they are evil. The reason for this is that hearts are not manifest. But in that judgment there will be absolutely perfect certainty, because there will be a manifestation of hearts. Hence, he says, be manifested: “Therefore do not pronounce judgment before the time, before the Lord comes, who will bring to light the things now hidden in darkness and will disclose the purposes of the heart” (1 Cor. 4:5).

Thirdly, he tells why the judgment will be necessary, because no one shall be able to escape that judgment either by another’s intercession or by contumacy: “That you may know that there is a judgment” (Job 19:29); “For God will bring every deed into judgment, with every secret thing, whether good or evil” (Ec. 12:14).

Fourthly, he discloses the authority of the judge; hence, he says, before the judgment seat [tribunal] of Christ, who will come to judge men in the same form in which he was judged by men, so that appearing in human form, he may be seen by the good and by the evil; for the wicked cannot see the glory of God: “And has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man” (Jn. 5:27). “Tribunal” implies juridical power, and is taken from an ancient custom of the Romans, who chose three tribunes of the people, whose function was to pass judgment on the excesses of consuls and senators. Their places were called tribunals.

Fifthly, he speaks of the equity of the judge, because there will be rewards or punishments according to one’s merits. Hence, he says, so that each one may receive good or evil, according to what he has done: “He will render to each one according to his works” (Rom. 2:5). He says, in the body, not only for things accomplished with bodily movement, but for those accomplished by the mind; otherwise, unbelievers would not be punished. Therefore, when he says, in the body, it is understood to mean things performed while he lived in the body.
