# Chapter 4, Lecture 5

> 16 So we do not lose heart. Though our outer nature is wasting away, our inner nature is being renewed every day. 17 For this slight momentary affliction is preparing for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison, 18 because we look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen; for the things that are seen are transient, but the things that are unseen are eternal.

144. – Having mentioned the patience which the Apostle showed in tribulations and manifested the reward they expected, he then treats of the cause of patience and the mode or reason for patience. In regard to this he does three things. First, he hints at the patience of the saints; secondly, the cause of patience (v. 16b); thirdly, the reward of patience (v. 17).

145. – In regard to the first he intends to show that the patience of the saints is unconquerable. Hence, he says, so, i.e., because we know that he who raised Jesus from the dead will raise us and place us with you; therefore we do not lose heart, namely, in our tribulations, i.e., we are reduced to the state in which we cannot bear and endure more for Christ. For to lose heart is the same as not being able to bear: “I was wearied, not being able to bear it” (Jer. 20:9).

146. – But the reason why we do not fail is that although we fail as to the outward man, we are always renewed as to the inward man. Hence, he says, though our outer nature is wasting away, our inner nature is being renewed every day. Here it should be noted that by occasion of these words a certain heretic, Tertullian by name, said that the rational soul, which is in the body of a man, has a bodily shape and bodily members, just as the body has; and this is called the inward man. This, of course, is false. Hence, to understand the passage, it must be known that even according to the Philosopher in *Ethics* 9.9, and according to the way we speak, each thing is said to be that which is most important in it. For example, the most important thing in the city is the power and the council, so that whatever the power and council do, the city is said to do. Now something can be judged the most important thing in man either in truth or according to appearance. In truth the most important thing in man is the mind. Hence, according to the judgment of spiritual men, the mind is called the inward man. But according to appearance, the most important thing is the outward body with its senses. Hence, according to the judgment of those who consider only bodily and sense-perceptible things and savor earthly things, and whose god is the belly, the body with the sense is called the outward man.

147. – Therefore, it is according to this manner that the Apostle is speaking here when he says, though our outer nature, i.e., the body with its sentient nature, is wasting away, in tribulations, fasts, abstinences and watchings: “Our old self was crucified with him” (Rom. 6:6); “Rottenness enters into my bones” (Hab. 3:16), yes this man, who is inner, namely, the mind or reason strengthened with the shield of faith, is being renewed. This should be understood in the following way: oldness is the road to corruption: “And what is becoming obsolete and growing old is ready to vanish away” (Heb. 8:13). But human nature was established in wholeness, and if it had continued in that wholeness, it would have always been new. But through sin it began to be corrupted. As a result, whatever followed, such as ignorance, difficulty in doing good, inclination to evil, punishment, and so on, all pertain to oldness. Therefore, when such a human nature gets rid of the results of sin, it is said to be renewed. Such riddance begins in the saints here, but is perfectly completed in heaven. For here the oldness of sin is put off; for the spirit removes the oldness of sin and is subjected to the newness of justice. Here the intellect removes errors and assumes the newness of truth. It is according to this that the inner man, namely, the soul, is renewed: “Be renewed in the spirit of your minds” (Eph. 4:23). But in heaven, even the oldness of punishment is removed. Hence, there will be a complete renewal there: “Your youth is renewed like the eagle’s” (Ps. 103:5). But because the saints advance daily in purity of conscience and knowledge of divine things, he says, every day: “Ascending in his heart” (Ps. 84:7, Vulgate). Consequently, patience is unconquerable, because it is renewed from day to day.

148. – The third point, namely, the cause of this patience, is recognition of a reward. This recognition is most efficacious, because, according to Gregory, it lessens the force of a scourge. And this is what he says: For this [present], slight momentary affliction is preparing for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison. As if to say: the tribulations we suffer here are nothing, if we look to the glory we obtain from them. Hence, he compares the condition of the saints in this life to the condition of those in heaven and mentions five things in each state that correspond.

149. – First, the condition of the present life in the saints is of itself slight and, as it were, imperceptible. Hence, he says, this, i.e., the least: “For a brief moment I forsook you” (Is. 54:7). Likewise it is transitory; hence he says, present, i.e., in this life, which is one of affliction and toil: “The life of man is warfare” (Job 7:1, Vulgate). Likewise it lasts a short time; hence he says, momentary: “For a moment I hid my face from you” (Is. 54:8). For the whole time of this present life compared to eternity is only momentary. Likewise it is light; hence he says, slight. For although he said above (1:8): “We were crushed,” because the body is heavy, yet it is very light to a spirit on fire with charity. Hence Augustine says: “All that is heavy and huge love makes easy and almost nothing.” Likewise it is penal; hence he says, [of our] affliction: “I will bear the indignation of the Lord because I have sinned against him” (Mic. 7:9).

150. – But as to the state of happiness, he lays down five things, because in contrast to what is this, he places beyond all measure: “I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing to the glory that is to be revealed to us” (Rom. 8:18). But on the other hand: “He will give to each one according to his works” (Matt. 16:27). Therefore it will not be beyond all measure. I answer that the word “according” does not denote an equality of amount, as though a person will be rewarded so much for so much merit, but an equality of proportion, so that one who merits more will receive more reward. Likewise, against that which is in the present he places exceedingly, i.e., in an excellent state without disturbance: “I will make you ride upon the heights of the earth” (Is. 58:14). Against that which is momentary, he places eternal: “Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads” (Is. 35:10). Against that which is light he places a weight. He says, weight for two reasons: first, because a weight inclines and draws to its motion all things under it. In the same way eternal glory will be so great that it will make the whole man glorious in soul and in body. There will be nothing in man that does not follow the impulse of glory. Or it is called weight, because it is precious, for only precious things are weighed. Against that which is called tribulation he places of glory. Or of glory can be common to the other four, which are said of the state of glory, so that of tribulation is common to the four which are said of the present life. It is preparing, namely, above the tribulations we suffer, for these are the cause and merit for which God confers that glory on us. And so the patience of the saints is unconquerable, their reward ineffable, and the recompense of their reward right and delightful.

151. – Hence he says, because we look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen. As if to say: although the things we hope for are still to come, and in the meantime our body is corrupted, nevertheless, we are renewed, because we do not pay attention to those temporal things, but to eternal. And this is what he says: it works in us a weight of glory. In us, I say, not looking, i.e., not paying attention, to the things that are seen, i.e., earthly things, but to the things that are unseen, namely, heavenly things: “Forgetting what lies behind and straining forward to what lies ahead” (Phil. 3:13); “Eye has not seen nor ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived, God has prepared for those who love him” (1 Cor. 2:9). And why do we look on heavenly things? Because the things that are seen, i.e., earthly things, are transient and temporal, but the things that are unseen, namely, heavenly things, are eternal: “My salvation will be forever” (Is. 51:6).
