# Chapter 11, Lecture 6

27 In toil and hardship, through many a sleepless night, in hunger and thirst, often without food, in cold and exposure. 28 And, apart from other things, there is the daily pressure upon me of my anxiety for all the churches. 29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is made to fall, and I am not indignant? 30 If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness. 31 The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, he who is blessed for ever, knows that I do not lie. 32 At Damascus, the governor under King Aretas guarded the city of Damascus in order to seize me, 33 but I was let down in a basket through a window in the wall, and escaped his hands.

429. – Here he lists the evils voluntarily assumed, namely, those endured in homes, and he lists three evils opposed to the three goods which are necessary for domestic life. The first good is restful sleep; the second is sustenance from food; the third is the warmth of clothing. To restful sleep he opposes labor and watchings, in regard to which he says, in toil, i.e., manual labor: “You yourselves know that these hands ministered to my necessities, and to those who were with me” (Ac. 20:34), because he literally made his living with his own hands: “With toil and labor we worked night and day, that we might not burden any of you.” (2 Th. 3:8). As to the weakness resulting from labor he says, and hardship [tiredness], which is a weakness and tiredness that follows upon labor or from a natural sickness: “My strength was dried up as by the heat of summer” (Ps. 32:4). But in regard to watchings he says, through many a sleepless night, because he devoted himself either to preaching at night or to manual labor. In Ac. (20:7) it says that he prolonged his sermon until midnight.

430. – To sustenance from food he opposes two forms of being denied food. One is due to necessity; hence he says, in hunger and thirst, namely, because he was unable frequently to obtain food and drink: “To the present hour we hunger and thirst” (1 Cor. 4:11); the other is voluntary; hence he says, often without food, i.e., voluntarily undertaken both for the good example and to tame the flesh: “I pommel my body and subdue it” (1 Cor. 9:27). But this seems to be out of harmony with Matt. (6:33): “But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things shall be yours as well.” Why then in hunger and thirst? I answer that when it is expedient and for our benefit, they are added, i.e., temporal things; but sometimes it is expedient to lack them.

431. – To the warmth of clothing he opposes two things: one on the part of nature; hence he says, in cold; the other on the part of poverty, hence he says, and exposure. I am proved a minister of Christ: “We are ill-clad and buffeted and homeless” (1 Cor. 4:11); “In afflictions, hardships, calamities” (2 Cor. 6:4).

432. – Then when he says, And, apart from other things, he lists the internal evils he assumed, namely, those caused by anxiety of heart because of the activities of the false apostles. Now a good prelate is concerned about two things affecting his subjects, namely, their safety and the defection. And the Apostle suffered affliction in regard to both; the first, when he says, and, apart from other things, there is the daily pressure upon me of my anxiety for all the churches. As if to say: in addition to what I suffer and have suffered from outside, the internal affliction is more oppressive, that is, solicitude for his subjects. Hence, he says, the daily pressure for all the churches is great and lies heavily upon him, because he was very solicitous: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things” (Lk. 10:41); “He that rules, with solicitude” (Rom. 12:8, Vulgate).

433. – The second affliction he suffered concerned the failings of his subjects, and this he does in two ways, namely for spiritual failings; hence he says, Who is weak, namely, in faith and in goodness, and I am not weak? In heart, grieving over them as though over myself? “To the weak I became weak, that I might win the weak.” (1 Cor. 9:22); “O that my head were waters, and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!” (Jer. 9:1). And for bodily failings; hence he says, Who is made to fall with the evil of punishment, i.e., who suffers afflictions, and I am not indignant [on fire] with the fire of compassion? This is the fire which the Lord came to cast upon the earth (Lk. 12:49).

434. – And notice that he fittingly uses the word, “on fire”, because compassion proceeds from the love of God and neighbor, which is a consuming fire, because it moves one to alleviate the misfortunes of one’s neighbor, and it cleanses the soul with the compassion it engenders. Furthermore, our sins are loosed, while the charity of that compassion covers a multitude of sins. For a person sometimes falls into sin of himself, and then he is weakened; sometimes by the example of others, and then he is scandalized: “Woe to the man by whom the temptation comes!” (Matt. 18:7).

435. – Then when he says, if I must boast, he confirms some of the statements made above. Or say that above he speaks about the evils he commendably suffered; but here about the evils he prudently avoided. But because the avoidance of evils that arise against the faith seems to imply weakness, therefore, first, he states that he wishes to glory in those that imply weakness; secondly, he proposes an oath to confirm his statements (v. 31); thirdly, he shows how he avoided some evils (v. 32).

436. – First, therefore, he suggests that the things in which one should glory, if he must glory, saying: If, i.e., because I must, I must boast [glory], I will boast of the things that show my weakness. As if to say: others may glory in their race and other worldly things: “They glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things” (Phil. 3:19), and I when compelled gloried in them. Yet if I must glory, I will glory in my weakness: “I will all the more gladly boast of my weaknesses, that the power of Christ may rest upon me” (2 Cor. 12:9).

437. – Secondly, he states that he is not lying and is calling on God to witness after the manner of an oath, so that they will believe his, saying, The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, he who is blessed for ever, knows that I do not lie. Here he lays down three things. One by which to induce fear; hence he says, God: “Who would not fear thee, O King of the nations?” (Jer. 10:7); one by which he excites love, when he says, Father: “Every good endowment and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights” (Jas. 1:17); “If then I am a father, where is my love?”, or according to another version, “my honor?” (Mal. 1:5); thirdly, to inspire reverence and praise, who is blessed forever: “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ” (2 Cor. 1:3). He, therefore, so revered, so worthy of love, so worthy of fear, knows that I do not lie, namely, in what I have said and will say: “Our word to you has not been Yes and No” (2 Cor. 1:17).

438. – Then when he says, At Damascus, he shows the evils he avoided, and this in a certain particular danger. Here it should be noted that the Apostle first began to preach Christ in Damascus, where he was thrown to the ground and converted to the faith, as he was on his way to arrest Christians. Therefore, the Jews appealed to the governor of that city, who was representing Aretas the king, to arrest Paul and put him to death. So the governor ordered the city-gates to be watched day and night, as it says in Ac. (chap. 9). But the Christians who were there, desiring to save Paul, lowered him by the wall in a basket. This form of escape the Apostle touches on, when he says: truly I am not lying about what I am telling you now: for at Damascus, the governor under King Aretas, i.e., the governor who ruled at Damascus under king Aretas, was induced by the Jews to guard the city of the Damascenes to seize me, so that after I was apprehended, I would be delivered to the Jews and prevented from preaching. But I was let down in a basket through a window in the wall, and escaped his hands, namely, the governor’s. This was done in keeping with the Lord’s command: “When they persecute you in one town, flee to the next” (Matt. 10:23). In this way too did Michel let David down through a window to escape from Saul (1 Sam. 19:12), and Rahab let the spies down with a cord out of a window (Jos. 2:15).

439. – But some object against the Apostle’s conduct: first, because he seems to have lacked confidence in the Lord and fled. I answer that as long as human help is available, a man should not run for divine help, because this would be tempting God; but he should use human help as much as he can. But the Apostle was not yet lacking human help. The second objection is based on Jn. (10:12): “He who is a hireling and not a shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees the wolf coming and leaves the sheep and flees.” Hence, it seems that Paul was not a good shepherd. I answer that sometimes the person of the prelate alone is sought, and sometimes the prelate along with all the people. When the prelate alone is sought, then he should entrust his duties to another and absent himself. This is what Paul did. Hence, a Gloss says that although he fled, he still took care of his people by commending them to the Good Shepherd seated in heaven and saving himself for their benefit by flight. But when the entire flock is sought, then he should prefer the benefit and safety of the flock to his own bodily safety. But note that there is a flight inspired by humility, when a person flees honors, as Christ fled when they sought to make him king (Jn. 6:15). In the same way Saul, when chosen, concealed himself at home (1 Sam. 10:22). Another is inspired by caution, namely, when a person flees dangers in order to be saved for greater ones. This is the way Elijah fled from Jezebel (1 Kg. 19:3), and the way the Apostle fled from the hands of the governor.
