# Chapter 9, Lecture 2

8 And God is able to provide you with every blessing in abundance, so that you may always have enough of everything and may provide in abundance for every good work. 9 As it is written, “He scatters abroad, he gives to the poor; his righteousness endures for ever.” 10 He who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply and multiply your resources and increase the harvest of your righteousness. 11 You will be enriched in every way for great generosity, which through us will produce thanksgiving to God; 12 for the rendering of this service not only supplies the wants of the saints but also overflows in many thanksgivings to God. 13 Under the test of this service, you will glorify God by your obedience in acknowledging the gospel of Christ, and by the generosity of your contribution for them and for all others; 14 while they long for you and pray for you, because of the surpassing grace of God in you. 15 Thanks be to God for his inexpressible gift!

333. – Here he gives the reason for the three ways of giving. In regard to this he does two things. First, he assigns the reason taken on their part; secondly, the reason taken on God’s part (v. 11). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he gives the reason; secondly, he confirms it (v. 9).

334. – The reason is this: whoever gives something which is multiplied for him should give promptly, abundantly and cheerfully, just as when we see men sowing seed abundantly and promptly and cheerfully, because they gather it up again multiplied. Since therefore alms are multiplied for those who give them, you should give them promptly, joyfully and abundantly. That they are multiplied is evident, because God is able to provide you with every blessing. As if to say: do not be afraid to give, as though you will be burdened with need and regret having given, because God is able to provide you with every blessing of the Holy Spirit in abundance, namely, the grace by which you will always rejoice in the good work you have done. He says therefore, so that you may always be provided in abundance for every good work, i.e., have an abundant will to give alms, just s you have for the other works of the virtues, and also that you have a full sufficiency of external goods; hence he says, always having enough of everything, i.e., considering yourself to have: “He gives to all men generously and without reproaching, and it will be given him” (Jas. 1:5); “But if we have food and clothing, with these we shall be content” (1 Tim. 6:8). Of that sufficiency it says below (2 Cor. 12:9): “My grace is sufficient for you.” But concerning the multiplication it says in Is. (30:25): “And he will give rain for the seed with which you sow the ground”; “And every one who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands, for my name’s sake, will receive a hundredfold, and inherit eternal life” (Matt. 19:29).

335. – Then when he says, As it is written, he proves his reason in two ways, namely, by authority and from experience. He proves it by an authority when he says: rightly should this reason move you, because, As it is written, “He scatters abroad, he gives to the poor; his righteousness endures for ever.” But a Gloss adduces this authority in a sense different from the Apostle’s intention; for the Gloss says: I say that you shall abound for every good work, namely, by the giving of alms, because, As it is written, “He scatters abroad, he gives to the poor.” But the Apostle wishes to refer this to his statement that God is able to make every grace abound in you; and this, because he who scattered abroad and given to the poor, his justice remains forever: “Do good to a godly man, and you will be repaid” (Sir. 12:2). In the authority cited we note to whom should be given, namely, to the poor, i.e., to the needy: “When you give a dinner or a banquet, do not invite your friends or your brothers or your kinsmen or rich neighbors, lest they also invite you in return, and you be repaid” (Lk. 14:12); how to give, namely, he scatters abroad, i.e., not all to one person, but divided among many: “If I give away all I have” (1 Cor. 13:3); “Is it not to share your bread with the hungry” (Is. 58:7); his righteousness [justice], i.e., the reward for justice, endures forever: “But one who sows righteousness gets a sure reward” (Prov. 11:18).

336. – He confirms his reason by experience when he says, He who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food. As if to say: you know from experience that what you give in alms you have from the Lord; therefore you should give gladly for the love of God: “For all things come from you, and of your own have we given you” (1 Ch. 29:14). He suggests three things in regard to this. The first is that someone could say: if we give now what we have, what is necessary for daily food will be wanting to us. But he rejects this, saying: he not only supplies seed to the sower, but bread for food, i.e., the necessities of life: “He who gives food to all flesh” (Ps. 136:24). The second is that they could say: if we give much, we will not have enough to give again. The Apostle answers this, saying that they will not want, but he will multiply your sowing, from which you can give more alms. The third is that someone could say: if we give now, the will to give will be lost, and we will regret having given, and so we shall lose everything. But he removes this, saying: he will increase the harvest of your righteousness [justice], i.e., he will increase the ability to give alms and the will from which your justice proceeds, to such a degree that you will always be prepared and ready to give alms, and the fruit will be the most in comparison with the small seed: “Honor the LORD with your substance and with the first fruits of all your produce” (Prov. 3:9); “I will command my blessing upon you” (Lev. 25:21); “Godliness is of value in every way” (1 Tim. 4:8).

337. – The when he says, You will be enriched in every way, after having assigned the reason why they should give promptly, abundantly and cheerfully on the part of the donors, he then assigns the reason on God’s part, for whom they ought to give. First he assigns the reason they should give; secondly, he explains it (v. 12).

338. – In the reason to be assigned, three things are to be considered, the first of which is their enrichment, which corresponds to what has gone above. For he had said above: he will multiply your sowing and increase the fruits of your justice; and he recalls the first, saying: You will be enriched in every way, i.e., both in bodily and spiritual goods: “That in every way you were enriched in him” (1 Cor. 1:5). But lest anyone suppose that his end should be placed in an abundance of temporal riches or that he should possess spiritual goods in idleness without using them, he refers this first to another second thing: have great generosity directed by a simple spirit, so that the giving comes from temporal goods but the simplicity from spiritual goods: “The integrity of the upright guides them” (Prov. 11:13). But this should itself be referred to another end, namely, to God; therefore he adds in the third place, which, namely, simple abundance, through us will produce thanksgiving to God: “Give thanks in all circumstances” (1 Th. 5:18).

339. – Then when he says, for the rendering of this service, he explains the reason mentioned above, namely, how their abundance works thanksgiving to God. First he shows this; secondly, the reason for thanks (v. 13); thirdly, he breaks out in thanksgiving (v. 14).

340. – He says therefore: I say that your abundance works thanksgiving to God, for the rendering of this service of yours, by which you help the saints, has many good results: “As a matter of equality your abundance at the present time should supply their want” (2 Cor. 8:14). Not only does this good follow therefrom, but also the fact that they pray for you and give thanks to God, proving and approving your service. And this is what he says: but also overflows in many thanksgivings to God, which are given by many, not only by the perfect, but by the poor believers who give thanks to God in the Lord, who moves them to this, seeing and approving your ministry: “So that many will give thanks on our behalf for the blessing granted us in answer to many prayers” (2 Cor. 1:2).

341. – This thanksgiving is given for three reasons. First, for their faith, which they have received; hence he says: I say that they abound in thanksgiving, the faithful glorifying God by your obedience in acknowledging the gospel of Christ, i.e., the confession of your faith, by which you confess and believe in Christ: “Let your light so shine before men” (Matt. 5:16); “The word of a man who hears will endure” (Prov. 21:28). Secondly, on account of their abundance; hence he says, glorifying God also for the generosity of your contribution for them, namely, the holy poor, and for all others, namely, the faithful in need, and given with a simple and pure spirit: “Let him who is taught the word share all good things with him who teaches” (Gal. 6:6); and “Let us do good to all men” (Gal. 6:10). Thirdly, on account of what these saints have from God that they may give thanks to God; hence he says: glorifying God also in their praying for you, i.e., they glorify God for the fact that those holy men pray for you; the men, I say, who are desirous of seeing you in eternal happiness; and this because of the surpassing grace of God in you.

342. – From this the Apostle breaks forth in thanksgiving to God, saying: Thanks be to God for his inexpressible gift!, that is, for the charity which is especially seen in you who even help those who thus thank God and pray for you. This gift is inexpressible, because it cannot be said how profitable it is, for “What no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived, what God has prepared for those who love him” (1 Cor. 2:9).
