# Chapter 12, Lecture 4

11 I have been a fool! You forced me to it, for I ought to have been commended by you. For I am not at all inferior to these superlative apostles, even though I am nothing. 12 The signs of a true apostle were performed among you in all patience, with signs and wonders and mighty works. 13 For in what were you less favored than the rest of the churches, except that I myself did not burden you? Forgive me this wrong!

484. – Having commended himself, the Apostle now asks pardon for what he has said, showing that he was compelled to say these things which pertain to his glory. First, he lays the blame for his glorying on the Corinthians; secondly, he explains and clarifies this (v. 11b).

485. – First, therefore, he says: I confess that in all these commendations I have been a fool, i.e., it seems to you that I have performed the work of a fool. But this was not done of myself or willingly; rather, I was compelled, and it was your fault, because you forced me to it, i.e., gave me the occasion. For subjects frequently compel their prelates to do things which seem unwise to do, although considering the time and place, they were done wisely.

486. – Then he explains what he had said in a general way, namely, that they were the cause of his commending himself, when he says: for I ought to have been commended by you. Here he says that they were the cause of his commending himself: first, by neglecting the good they should have done, in which he enlarges upon their ingratitude; secondly, by committing evil, in which he execrates their malice (v. 20). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he reminds them what they ought to have done by showing the cause (v. 11c); secondly, he rejects their excuse (v. 13).

487. – He says therefore: yes, you compelled me, because you should have done what I have done; hence he says: for I ought to have been commended by you, which you have not done when in was necessary, that is, when the false apostles by belittling me and preferring themselves rendered vile the doctrine and gospel of Christ delivered by me. Hence, because you did not commend me, then in order that the faith of Christ not die among you, I undertook to commend myself. But this is in conflict with his earlier statement (3:1): “Do we need, as some do, letters of recommendation to you, or from you?” So why would he wish to be commended by them? I answer that the Apostle did not need commendations for himself, but for others, namely, that in commending himself his doctrine would be held in greater authority and the false apostles refuted.

488. – But because they could say: “we did not commend you, because there is nothing commendable about you,” the Apostle proves to them that they had good cause to commend him, when he says: For I am not at all inferior to these superlative apostles, thus showing that there was much in him commendable. First, as to the past good things he did; secondly, as to the good things he intends to do (v. 14). First, in general as to all the churches; secondly, in particular as to what he did among them (v. 11d); thirdly he excludes an objection (v. 13).

489. – He says therefore: I deserved to be commended by you, because there are many things in me worthy of commendation, for I am not at all inferior, namely, Peter and James and John, who are superlative apostles, i.e., who seem to some to be worthier apostles than I. For the false apostles said that they had been taught by Peter and John, who had been taught by Christ, and that Peter and John observed the ceremonies of the Law; hence, that they too should observe them. But because I have done nothing else among you, either as to preaching or to converting believers or performing miracles and undertaking labours, but rather have done more, because “I worked harder than any of them” (1 Cor. 15:10), for that reason I am more to be commended. Or they were called superlative apostles, that is, Peter, James and John, because they were the first ones converted to Christ: “Last of all, as to one untimely born, he appeared also to me” (1 Cor. 15:8). If it is taken in this sense, even then I have done nothing less than they, because in the short time after I was converted, I labored more.

490. – But granting that I did nothing in regard to the other churches for which I might be commended, nevertheless I have done many special things among you, and for these you could have commended me; hence he says, even though I am nothing, i.e., granting that I did nothing in comparison to them, nevertheless, the effect of my power is present among you. First, as to our preaching, by which you were converted to the faith, and I am your apostle. Yet the signs of a true apostle, i.e., of my preaching, were performed among you by God, inasmuch as believing, you were converted: “You are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord” (1 Cor. 9:2); “For I became your father in Christ Jesus through the gospel” (1 Cor. 4:15). Secondly, by the manner of life through which faith is strengthened, because when one’s life agrees with his doctrine, the doctrine has greater authority, and the virtue of the preacher is more apparent through patience: “The learning of a man is known by patience” (Prov. 19:11, Vulgate); therefore he says, in all patience. Thirdly, as to working miracles; hence he says, with signs and wonders and mighty works: “And they went forth and preached everywhere, while the Lord worked with them and confirmed the message by the signs that attended it” (Mk. 16:20)

491. – These three things are distinct, because “might” [virtus] is common to all miracles, for might is the full extent of a power. Therefore, something is called mighty [virtuosum] because it proceeds from great power [virtute]. Therefore, because miracles come from great power, namely the divine, they are therefore called “powers” [virtutes]. But “sign” refers to a lesser miracle, and “wonder” to a greater one. Or he says “signs” as to miracles performed in regard to the present and “wonders” in regard to miracles concerning the future. Or signs and wonders refer to miracles done contrary to nature; for example, giving sight to the blind, raising from the dead, and so on. But mighty deeds are things according to nature, not performed in the way nature does, as for a sick man to be healed immediately, when one’s hands are placed on him; for nature produces the same effect step by step. Or mighty deeds mean the virtues of the mind, such as chastity and so on.

492. – Then he excludes an objection, when he says, For in what were you less favored than the rest of the churches? For the Corinthians could answer and say: it is true that you have done many good and great things, but others have done more and greater things than you. Therefore, we are not willing to commend you to them or in comparison with them. But he excludes this, saying: For in what were you less favored than the rest of the churches? i.e., than the other churches of Christ have obtained through him in spiritual matters. As if to say: nothing, because they preached the faith and the Apostle preached the faith; they showed signs and wonders, and so did the Apostle. In fact not only do you not have less, but even more, because the other apostles live on the revenues of those to whom they preached, but not the Apostle. For he took nothing from the Corinthians; hence he says: except that I myself did not burden you by taking what was yours. As if to say: you received nothing less, unless perhaps you count it as less that I have not taken anything from you, which however is more: “You yourselves know that these hands ministered to my necessities, and to those who were with me” (Ac. 20:34); “With toil and labor we worked night and day” (2 Th. 3:8); “Who shakes his hands, lest they hold a bribe” (Is. 33:15). But if you count this an injury, namely, that I refused to take anything from you (as I did not), because I did not love you, and it seems to you that I have done wrong, spare me. Hence he says in irony, forgive, that is, spare me this wrong! In this manner it says in Eph. (4:32): “Forgiving one another, as God in Christ forgave you.”
