# Chapter 2, Lecture 1

> 1 For I made up my mind not to make you another painful visit. 2 For if I cause you pain, who is there to make me glad but the one whom I have pained? 3 And I wrote as I did, so that when I came I might not suffer pain from those who should have made me rejoice, for I felt sure of all of you, that my joy would be the joy of you all. 4 For I wrote you out of much affliction and anguish of heart and with many tears, not to cause you pain but to let you know the abundant love that I have for you.

48. – After giving a general excuse for his delay in visiting the Corinthians, the Apostle now gives the cause of his delay and how he spared them. In regard to this he does two things: first, he mentions that one cause of his delay was that he might not pain them by coming; secondly, he shows that another cause was that the fruit he hoped for from others and which was beginning to ripen, might not be hindered (v. 12). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he shows that the cause of his delay in general was to avoid paining them; secondly, he speaks in particular about a certain person who had grieved him (v. 5). In regard to the first he does three things: first, he tells why he postponed his visit; secondly, he gives the reason for his statement (v. 2); thirdly, he explains what he said (v. 4).

49. – He says, therefore: I have said that it was in order not to grieve you that I did not come to you. Therefore, I made up my mind, i.e., about what I mentioned when I sent the other letter: “Reason is the beginning of every work, and counsel precedes every undertaking” (Sir. 37:16); not to make you another painful visit, i.e., not to cause you pain. The reason he did not wish to grieve them is the same one whereby the Lord did not wish his disciples to fast, namely, in order that they be drawn to Christ and be joined to him not by fear but by love. For the Lord wished to strengthen and nourish them in the faith in all sweetness and heartfelt desire, so that, being thus established in love, they would not easily turn away from him because of tribulations, for “many waters cannot extinguish love” (Sg. 8:7). For the same reason the Apostle does not want to pain them on this account.

50. – He assigns the reason for what he says, namely, that he does not want to pain them, when he says, for if I cause you pain, who is there to make me glad but the one whom I have pained? In regard to this he does two things: first, he deals with the reason why he did not wish to pain them; secondly, he shows why he tells them this (v. 3).

51. – He says, therefore: the reason why I did not wish you to fall into sadness was that your sadness pains me, and I rejoice in your consolation; and you only console me when I am with you. Hence, if I had come and pained you, I would be sad at your sadness; then there would be no one among you to gladden me, because you would be sad on my account. For one who is sad does not easily console another person: “A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son is a sorrow to his mother” (Prov. 10:1); “He who loves wisdom makes his father glad” (Prov. 29:3). Or in another way, there are two kinds of sadness. One is according to the world, and the other according to God who produces repentance leading to salvation. The Apostle is not speaking of the first, but of the second. He says: I will be consoled if I cause you pain, i.e., if by scolding you I bring you to repentance; but if I had come and seen you unrepentant of your sins, I would have had no consolation, because no one is sad and repentant because of me, i.e., because of my correction and rebuke.

52. – But the reason I write this to you is that you so adjust yourselves, that when I come, I will not be sad at seeing you uncorrected, in addition to the sadness I experienced when I heard that you had sinned. In regard to this he does two things: first, he gives his admonition; secondly, he shows that he is confident it will be obeyed (v. 3b). The admonition is this: I wrote as I did, namely, that I am pained at the sin you committed: “he was vexed in his righteous soul day after day with their lawless deeds” (2 Pet. 2:8), in order that you might prepare and arrange yourselves by correction, so that when I came I might not suffer pain at your sins from those who should have made me rejoice, i.e., I ought to rejoice and be glad in your presence: “There is joy before the angels of God over one sinner who repents” (Lk. 15:10). The confidence he had that they would follow his admonition is indicated when he says, for I felt sure of all of you. As if to say: I have this confidence in you, that you will be so disposed, that when I come, all of you will give me reason for joy; and you should do this cheerfully, that my joy would be the joy of you all, i.e., it would contribute to your joy, or it is for the sake of your joy, which you have from the recovery of grace: “Rejoice with those who rejoice” (Rom. 12:15)

53. – But because someone might be in doubt at his saying, so that when I came I might not suffer pain, and ask what sort of pain he had for them, he explains this saying, for I wrote you out of much affliction and anguish of heart. In regard to this he does two things: first, he mentions the pain he has already suffered; secondly, he answers a tacit question (v. 4b).

54. – First, therefore, he says: I would be pained if I found you uncorrected—a greater pain than I had when you sinned and I was obliged to sadden you with a sharp rebuke: for I wrote you in the first epistle out of much affliction and anguish of heart and with many tears, which I shed for you when you were already dead in sin: “O that my head were waters, and my eyes a fountain of tears” (Jer. 9:1); “It is a disgrace to be the father of an undisciplined son” (Sir. 22:3); “The righteous man perishes and no one lays it to heart” (Is. 57:1). But it should be noted that he mentions two things that amplify his pain, namely, affliction and anguish, because one added to the other increases sadness. For sometimes a person is sad but without anguish, namely, when he is pricked by some adversity as though by a very sharp thorn; and yet various ways of escape seem open to him, because if no way is open, anguish is joined to affliction. He says, therefore, for I wrote you out of much affliction, with which he was pricked by your deeds and your evil, and anguish of heart, because he could not see where a remedy could easily be found: “Trouble and anguish have come upon me” (Ps. 119:143).

55. – But because they could say, O Apostle, you even write these things to pain us, he anticipates this, saying, not to cause you pain do I write these things to you, but to let you know the abundant love that I have for you. For there are two signs of love, namely, to rejoice in the good of another and to be pained at his evil; and I have these toward you: “For the love of Christ controls us” (2 Cor. 5:14). More abundantly than you think, or more abundantly than toward others.
