# Chapter 44

11 For while we live we are always being given up to death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh. 12 So death is at work in us, but life in you. 13 Since we have the same spirit of faith as he had who wrote, “I believed, and so I spoke,” we too believe, and so we speak, 14 knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with Jesus and bring us with you into his presence. 15 For it is all for your sake, so that as grace extends to more and more people it may increase thanksgiving, to the glory of God.

138. – Having mentioned the patience of the apostles in the midst of evils, and revealed the cause of their patience, the Apostle now explains them. First, he explains what he said about the hope of glory; secondly, what he said about his own patience (v. 16). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he shows the hope of glory that he has; secondly, he shows the source of this hope (v. 13).

139. – In regard to the first he does three things. First, he shows how he bears the mortification of Jesus in his body; secondly, how he bears the life of Jesus (v. 11b); thirdly, what he and others have obtained from this (v. 12). He says therefore: I say that we bear the death of Jesus in our bodies; not that we might die, but because while we live with bodily life or powers, we are always being given up to death or dangers of death; and this for Jesus’ sake: “We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter” (Ps. 44:22). But how we carry the life of Jesus in our body is explained when he says, so that the immortal and incorruptible life of Jesus may be manifested in our now mortal flesh, so that our mortal flesh may put on immortality at the resurrection: “This mortal nature must put on immortality” (1 Cor. 15:53). What results from this is mentioned when he continues, so death is at work, i.e., exercises its sway, in us, but life, namely, the present one, works in you, because you live in prosperity: “We are fools for Christ’s sake, but you are wise in Christ. We are weak, but you are strong” (1 Cor. 4:10). And death works in us a great good, namely, the attainment of spiritual life: “Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints” (Ps. 116:15). But the earthly life that you love works in you a great evil, namely, eternal death: “The wage of the righteous leads to life, the gain of the wicked to sin” (Prov. 10:16): “He who loves his life loses it, and he who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life” (Jn. 12:25). Or another way: there were two things in Christ, namely, bodily death and spiritual life. He says therefore, so death is at work in us. As if to say: not only does spiritual life work in us, inasmuch as we imitate him spiritually, but death is at work, i.e., because of the hope of the resurrection and for the love of Christ, the marks of Christ’s death appear in us, inasmuch as we are exposed to the sufferings of death: “For your sake we are slain all the day long” (Ps. 44:22). But in you, only the life of Christ works, through which faith and the spiritual life are planted in you.

140. – Then (v. 13) the Apostle shows how he acquired this hope of certainty. In regard to this he does two things. First, he states the cause of the certainty; secondly, he concludes to the certainty itself (v. 14).

141. – Now the cause of this certainty is the Spirit instilling faith into their hearts. First, therefore, he mentions this cause; secondly, he explains it with an example (v. 13b). He says therefore: the reason we hope and do not faint is that we have the same spirit of faith which the ancients had, because although the times have changed, the Spirit and the faith have not changed, except that they believed that the Christ would come and suffer, whereas we believe that he has already come and suffered. And this Spirit is the Holy Spirit, who is the Spirit of faith: “All these are inspired by one and the same Spirit, who apportions to each one individually as he wills” (1 Cor. 12:11). Having, therefore, this Spirit that the ancients had, we do the same things as they did and we believe. But what they did is described in Ps. 116:20, “I have believed”, namely, God perfectly. And this is what the ancients did: “And all these, though well attested by their faith, did not receive what was promised” (Heb. 11:39). And so, namely, for believing, I spoke, i.e., I confessed the faith: “For man believes with his heart and so is justified, and he confesses with his lips and so is saved” (Rom. 10:10). But we do this because, since we believe, we speak and confess the faith and preach: “We cannot but speak of what we have seen and heard” (Ac. 4:20). Therefore the Holy Spirit is the cause of this certitude.

142. – Finally, therefore, he reaches the intended conclusion, namely, the certitude itself. First, in regard to his own salvation; secondly, in regard to the salvation of others (v. 14b). He says therefore, knowing, i.e., having certain knowledge, that he who raised Jesus, i.e., God the Father or the entire Trinity, will raise us also with Jesus, namely, to put on the same glory as Jesus, because since we are his members, we should be with the head: “Where I am, there shall my servant be also” (Jn. 12:26); “He who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will give life to your mortal bodies also through his Spirit which dwells in you” (Rom. 8:11). And I am certain not only of our salvation but of yours also, because he will bring us with you, i.e., we will be together. For just as we are members of Christ, so you are also through us: “And so we shall always be with the Lord” (1 Th. 4:17); “Wherever the body is, there the eagles will be gathered together” (Matt. 24:28). Therefore he says, with you, to urge them to good, inasmuch as he shows that they are not inferiors but equals.

143. – And well can I say this with certainty, because all things are for your benefit. For all things, the sufferings we endure, the graces we receive from God, are for your sake, namely, that you be instructed by our example. And this, therefore, so that as grace extends from us, in you to more and more people it may increase thanksgiving to the glory of God, i.e., that many may thank God for so great a favor: “Always and for everything giving thanks in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father” (Eph. 5:20).
