# Chapter 72

4 I have great confidence in you; I have great pride in you; I am filled with comfort. With all our affliction, I am overjoyed. 5 For even when we came into Macedonia, our bodies had no rest but we were afflicted at every turn—fighting without and fear within. 6 But God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the coming of Titus, 7 and not only by his coming but also by the comfort with which he was comforted in you, as he told us of your longing, your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced still more. 8 For even if I made you sorry with my letter, I do not regret it (though I did regret it), for I see that that letter grieved you, though only for a while. 9 As it is, I rejoice, not because you were grieved, but because you were grieved into repenting.

251. – Having given an admonition derived from what went before, the Apostle now gives his commendation. In regard to this he does two things: first, he commends them, secondly, he explains it (v. 5).

252. – He commends them by showing his love, which springs from the good works the Corinthians did. For in the hearts of those who love there are four feelings (affectus) that usually arise from the good works, which the lovers accomplish. First, the feeling of confidence. Hence, he says, I have great confidence in you, inasmuch as I am confident that, having begun well, you will always get better. Consequently, from the good things I have heard about you I hope for greater things to come: “And I am sure that he who began a good work in you will bring it to completion at the day of Jesus Christ” (Phil. 1:6); “Though we speak thus, yet in your case, beloved, we feel sure of better things that belong to salvation” (Heb. 6:9). And this confidence is good and salutary: “Therefore do not throw away your confidence, which has a great reward” (Heb. 10:35).

253. – Secondly, from this confidence he conceives a feeling of glory; for as a result of loving a friend’s good as his own, a person glories in that good as he glories in his own. And this is especially true here, because he is the cause of their goods, as a teacher is the cause of his disciple’s doctrine. Hence he says, I have great pride in you: “The glory of a father is a wise son” (Prov. 10:1, Aquinas Latin).

254. – Then as a result of these two feelings he conceives a feeling of consolation, when the one who rejoices and glories in his own goods or in those of his friend has a remedy against sadness. This consolation is a cure for sadness; and according to the Philosopher every delight weakens or entirely destroys sadness. If the delight is contrary to the sadness, it totally swallows up the sadness; but if it is not contrary, it weakens or diminishes it. This is why when a person is sad, his sadness is lessened whenever something joyful is announced to him. Therefore, because he heard joyful things about the Corinthians, he says, I am filled with comfort, having heard of your amendment: “For as we share abundantly in Christ’s sufferings, so through Christ we share abundantly in comfort too” (2 Cor. 1:5); “So if there is any encouragement in Christ, any incentive of love, any participation in the Spirit, any affection and sympathy, complete my joy by being of the same mind, having the same love, being in full accord and of one mind” (Phil. 2:1-2).

255. – Fourthly, there finally arises a feeling of exuberant joy, for although sadness is lessened by certain delights, it is not entirely displaced unless there is great joy. But although the Apostle had endured many tribulations, yet because he found great joy in the good actions of the Corinthians, not only was sadness entirely absorbed, but his joy superabounds. Hence he says, With all our affliction, I am overjoyed, i.e., my joy overcomes every tribulation that was in my soul: “For what is our hope or joy or crown of boasting before our Lord Jesus at his coming?” (1 Th. 2:19); “Be patient in tribulation” (Rom. 12:12).

256. – Then when he says, For even when we came, he explains his commendation. But he said that he experienced two things, namely, joy and tribulation. First, therefore, he makes manifest his tribulation; secondly, his consolation (v. 6).

257. – He enlarges upon his tribulations for two reasons, namely, because the cure was removed, and because the tribulations were multiplied. Because of the removal of the cure he says: For even when we came, etc. As if to say: indeed I have tribulation, because I am consoled by no one, for even when we came into Macedonia, our bodies had no rest. Here he is referring to the persecution he suffered in Macedonia, when he freed a certain possessed maidservant, as we read in Acts (16:16). He says, our bodies had no rest, but not “our spirit,” because the saints always have peace in spirit. For even in adversity the soul, which suffers in the body, rests in the hope of a reward to come, although it suffers many things contrary to the desires of the flesh.

258. – But he enlarges upon his tribulations by reason of their number when he says, we were afflicted at every turn, i.e., every type of tribulation in the body and in the soul: “In the world you have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world” (Jn. 16:33). That he had suffered all tribulations he explains when he says, fighting without and fear within, i.e., outside myself the combat of persecutions, but within, i.e., in the heart, the fear of evil, fearing persecutions in the future: “In the open the sword shall bereave” (Deut. 32:25) But this seems contrary to Prov. (28:1): “But the righteous are bold as a lion.” I answer that he is without dread as to the spirit, but not as to the flesh. Or without, i.e., outside the Church, combats are started by unbelievers; but fear within, lest those who are in the Church fall away from the faith on account of persecutors. Or without, i.e., in public, fighting, because we are attacked by obvious enemies; fear within, which is produced in us by those who call themselves friends but are not. For as Boethius says in The Consolation: “No pest can inflict more harm than a friendly enemy”; “A man’s foes will be those of his own household” (Matt. 10:36).

259. – Then when he says, But God, who comforts, he states the reason for his consolation, which he applauds from two aspects, namely, from the gratifying presence of Titus and from the consolation of Titus (v. 7).

260. – He says therefore: although we were gravely afflicted here, God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the coming of Titus, whose presence was very pleasing and a great help to me: “Who comforts us in all our affliction” (2 Cor. 1:4). He says, who comforts the downcast [humble], because he does not comfort the proud but resists them, as it says in James (4:6) and 1 Pet. (5:5). But he comforts the humble by giving grace, which is the consolation of the Holy Spirit: “To comfort all who mourn” (Is. 61:2).

261. – And not only by his coming but also by the comfort with which he was comforted in you. Here he gives another reason for the Apostle’s consolation, namely, the consolation of Titus. The reason for this comfort is twofold: first, the amendment of the Corinthians, which they had in Titus’ presence; secondly, the devotion they showed to Titus (v. 13b). In regard to the first he does two things. First, he mentions his comfort in the repentance of the Corinthians; secondly, he explains something he has said (v. 9b). In regard to the first he does three things. First, he mentions the comfort of Titus; secondly, the reason for the comfort (v. 7b); thirdly, the effect of the comfort on the mind of the Apostle (v. 7c).

262. – He says therefore: God not only comforted us in the coming of Titus, but also in the comfort with which Titus was comforted by you and in you.

263. – The reason for this comfort is that Titus himself was comforted in you, as he told us of your longing, your mourning, your zeal for me. Here he mentions three praiseworthy things to counter the three blameworthy things that were in them. For they were lazy in regard to the good; against this he says, he told us of your longing to make more progress. They were also prone to evil; against this he says, your mourning, namely for sins committed: “Make mourning as for an only son” (Jer. 6:26). Finally, they were easily deceived by the false apostles; against this he says, your zeal against the false apostles for love of me. For previously you were zealous for them against me.

264. – Then when he says, so that I rejoiced still more, he mentions the feeling he conceived from Titus’ consolation, namely, one of joy. Hence, in regard to this he does three things: first, he mentions the joy he felt; secondly, he intimates his doubts; thirdly, the reason for the joy. He says therefore: I was so pleased with the things Titus related to me, that I rejoiced still more in that than I grieved in my tribulations. For spiritual things must be preferred to temporal things. Or that I rejoiced still more for having saddened you than I sorrowed before. For they had sinned by fornication, and the Apostle has rebuked them, as is evident from the first epistle (chaps. 5-6). But at that time he wondered what effect that sadness would have, whether good or bad; therefore, in his wonder he felt sad. But later, seeing that good had come from it, he was glad. Hence, he says: For even if I made you sorry with my letter, I do not regret it now, because you have been corrected. And though I did regret it before, namely, when I was uncertain whether the sadness would bring you to correct yourselves or to despair, seeing that that letter grieved you, though only for a while, now I am glad, because you have been converted. Then he gives the reason for his joy, because I am not glad that you were made sorrowful, but at the effect, namely, your amendment, because you were grieved not unto despair, but you were grieved into repenting; just as a physician is not glad at the bitterness of the medicine, but at the effect, namely, health: “As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing” (2 Cor. 6:10).
