# Chapter 3, Lecture 3

12 Since we have such a hope, we are very bold, 13 not like Moses, who put a veil over his face so that the Israelites might not see the end of the fading splendor. 14 But their minds were hardened; for to this day, when they read the old covenant, that same veil remains unlifted, because only through Christ is it taken away. 15 Yes, to this day whenever Moses is read a veil lies over their minds; 16 but when a man turns to the Lord the veil is removed. 17 Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom. 18 And we all, with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord, are being changed into his likeness from one degree of glory to another; for this comes from the Lord who is the Spirit.

100. – Having laid down what pertains to commending the gift received from God, he now lays down what pertains to commending the confidence born of that gift. In regard to this he does two things: first, he mentions the confidence born of the gift; secondly, he compares the confidence in the Old and in the New Testament (v. 13).

101. – He says, therefore, Since we have such a hope, because of what has been said to us, namely, of seeing the glory of God: “In this hope we were saved” (Rom. 8:24), we are very bold [multa fiducia utimur], i.e., we confidently do the things which pertain to the use of this ministry, from which our hope grows: “The righteous are bold as a lion” (Prov. 28:1); “Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord” (Jer. 17:7).

102. – Then as he preferred the one gift to the other, so he prefers the confidence [fiducia] of the New Testament to that of the Old (v. 13). In regard to this he does two things: first, he mentions a fact about the Old Testament; secondly, he explains it (v. 13b).

103. – The fact he proposes is mentioned in Exodus (34:33), where it says that when he spoke to the people, Moses veiled his face, because the children of Israel could not look upon him because of the splendor of his face. Hence he says, not like Moses, who put a veil over his face. As if to say: I say that we are very bold, and such as did not happen to us as Moses did to them, namely, not revealing his face to the people, because the time to reveal the splendor of truth had not yet come. Therefore, we have confidence [fiduciam] without the veil.

104. – Then he explains what he had said about the veil, saying, which is made void, for that veil was the dimness of the figures, which was made void by Christ. In regard to this he does three things. First, he mentions the voiding of this veil; secondly, how this voiding still prevails among the Jews (v. 14); thirdly, how this has no place among the ministers of the New Testament (v. 18).

105. – He says, therefore, that Moses put a veil, namely, of the figure, over his face; this veil is made void, i.e., is taken away by Christ, namely, by fulfilling in truth what Moses delivered in figure, because all things happened to them in a figure. For thus Christ by his death removed the veil of the killing of the paschal lamb. Therefore, as soon as he gave up his spirit, the veil of the Temple was rent. Likewise by sending the Holy Spirit into the hearts of believers so that they might understand spiritually what the Jews understood carnally. He removed the veil, when he opened their mind to understand the Scriptures (Lk. 24:45).

106. – What effect this voiding had on the Jews is shown (v. 14). In regard to this he does two things. First, he shows that it was not removed from them in the state of unbelief; secondly, he shows that it will be removed when they are converted (v. 16). In regard to the he does two things: first, he shows why this voiding has no place among the Jews; secondly, from this he shows that they still have the veil (v. 15).

107. – He says, therefore, that it is removed for those who believe, but not for the unbelieving Jews. The reason for this is that their minds were hardened, i.e., their reasoning power is dull and their senses weak and clouded, so that they cannot see the brightness of the divine light, i.e., of divine truth, without the veil of figures. The reason for this is that they close their eyes so as not to see, because the veil of the Temple was rent. Therefore, this is due to their sin of unbelief, and not to a weakness in the truth; because with the removal of the veil the truth is manifested very clearly to all who open the eyes of their mind through faith: “A hardening has come upon part of Israel” (Rom. 11:25); “For judgment I came into this world, that those who do not see may see, and that those who see may become blind” (Jn. 9:39). For this was foretold by Isaiah (6:10): “Make the heart of this people fat, and their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and turn and be healed.” And indeed their minds are so dulled to the truth that to this day they do not understand the truth manifested to us. But the same veil remains which was in the Old Testament before the veil of the Temple was rent, when they read the Old Testament, because they understand it no differently than before. For they still rely on figures, so as not to reveal the truth, i.e., not understand. Thus they still believe that the veil of God is not a figure, but the truth, which namely is lifted as to believers through Christ, i.e., in the faith of Christ. But it remains in them, because they do not believe that Christ has come.

108. – Then when he says, Yes, to this day whenever Moses is read a veil lies over their minds, he shows how even among the Jews the veil remains, as to unbelievers, although it has been removed by Christ. In regard to this it should be noted that a veil is said to be put on something in two ways: either because it is put on the thing seen, so that it cannot be seen; or because it is put on the one seeing, so that he may not see. But the veil was put on the Jews of the Old Law in both ways. For their eyes have been blinded not to see the truth because of their hardness; and the Old Testament had not yet been fulfilled, because the truth had not yet come. As a sign of this the veil was on Moses’ face and not theirs. But with the coming of Christ the veil was removed from the face of Moses, i.e., from the Old Testament, because it was not fulfilled: but it has not been removed from their hearts. Hence, he says, to this day the veil remains. As if to say: the veil has been removed from the believers of the Old Testament, but still when Moses is read, i.e., when the Old Testament is explained to them: “For from early generations, Moses has had in every city those who preach him, for he is read every sabbath in the synagogues” (Ac. 15:21), the veil, i.e. blindness, lies over their hearts: “A hardening has come upon part of Israel” (Rom. 11:25).

109. – But when and how that veil shall be removed from them is shown when he says, but when a man turns to the Lord the veil is removed. First he describes how to remove this veil; secondly, the reason for this (v. 17).

110. – He says, therefore, that this veil is still upon them; not that the Old Testament is veiled, but because their hearts are veiled. Therefore if it is to be removed, nothing remains but that they be converted. Hence, he says, but when a man turns, namely, some of them, to God through faith in Christ, the veil is removed by their conversion: “A remnant will return, the remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God” (Is. 10:21); and this is also stated in Romans (9:27). And note that when he treated of blindness, he spoke in the plural, saying over their hearts; but when he speaks of conversion, he speaks in the singular, saying, but when a man turns, to show how easy evil is and how difficult the good, as though few will be converted.

111. – But the reason why they are converted and the veil removed in this manner is because God wills it. For they could claim that God put the veil on them and therefore it cannot be removed. But the Apostle shows that it cannot only be removed, but even that it is removed by him who is the Lord. Hence, he says, now the Lord is the Spirit. This can be understood in two ways. In one way, so that Spirit is taken as the subject, as though saying: the Spirit, i.e., the Holy Spirit, namely who is the author of the Law, is the Lord, i.e., works by his own free will: “The Spirit blows where it wills” (Jn. 3:8); “The Spirit, who apportions to each one individually as he wills” (1 Cor. 12:11). And where the Spirit of the Lord is there is freedom; as if to say: because the Spirit is the Lord, he can give freedom to enable us freely to use the writings of the Old Testament without a veil. Therefore, those who do not have the Holy Spirit cannot use it freely: “You were called to freedom” (Gal. 5:13); “Live as free men, yet without using your freedom as a pretext for evil” (1 Pet. 2:16). It can be understood another way so that by the Lord is meant Christ, as though saying: the Lord, i.e., Christ, is Spirit, i.e., has spiritual power. Therefore, where the Spirit of the Lord is, i.e., the law of Christ spiritually understood, not in a written code, but impressed on the heart by faith, there is freedom from every obscurity of the veil.

112. – It should be noted that by occasion of these words, namely, where the Spirit of the Lord is there is freedom, and of those found in 1 Timothy (1:9): “The law is not laid down for the just”, some have erroneously said that spiritual men are not bound by the precepts of the divine law. But this is false, for God’s precepts are the rule of the human will. But there is no man or angel whose will does not need to be ruled and directed by divine law. Hence, it is impossible for any man not to be subject to God’s precepts. But the statement that “the law is not laid down for the just” means that the law was not laid down “for the just” who are led by an internal habit to do what the law of God commands, but because of the unjust. Nevertheless, this does not mean that the just are not bound to it. Similarly, where the Spirit of the Lord is there is freedom, is explained thus: the free man is one who exists for himself, but the servant exists for the sake of the master. Therefore, whoever acts of himself acts freely, but one who is moved by another does not act freely. Therefore, one who avoids evils, not because they are evil, but because of God’s commandment, is not free. But one who avoids evils because they are evils is free. But this is done by the Holy Spirit who perfects man inwardly with a good habit, so that from love he avoids evil, as if the divine law had commanded. Consequently, he is called free, not as though he is not subject to the divine law, but because he is inclined by a good habit to do what the divine law ordains.

113. – Then when he says, and we all, with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord, are being changed into his likeness from one degree of glory to another, he shows how the faithful of Christ are altogether free of this veil. He says, therefore: I say that this veil will be removed from them, when a person may be converted as we are; not a particular one, but we all who are Christ’s faithful: “To you it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God; but for others they are in parables” (Lk. 8:10). With unveiled face, not having a veil upon the heart, as they. By face is meant the heart or the mind, because just as a person sees bodily with the face, so spiritually with the mind: “Open my eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of your law” (Ps. 119:18). The glory of the Lord, not of Moses: for glory signifies brightness, as Augustine says. But the Jews saw some glory on the face of Moses as a result of his speaking with God. But this glory is imperfect, because it is not the glory with which God is glorious: and this is to know God himself. Or the glory of the Lord, i.e., the Son of God: “The glory of a father is a wise son” (Prov. 10:1, Vulgate).

114. – Beholding, i.e., speculating, which is not taken from the word which means “watch tower” (specula), but from “mirror” (speculum), i.e., knowing the glorious God himself by the mirror of reason, in which there is an image of God. We behold him when we rise from a consideration of ourselves to some knowledge of God, and we are transformed. For since all knowledge involves the knower’s being assimilated to the thing known, it is necessary that those who see be in some way transformed into God. If they see perfectly, they are perfectly transformed, as the blessed in heaven by the union of enjoyment: “When he appears we shall be like him” (1 Jn. 3:2); but if we see imperfectly, then we are transformed imperfectly, as here by faith: “Now we see in a mirror dimly” (1 Cor. 13:12).

115. – Therefore he says, into his likeness, that is, as we see, we are transformed, I say, from one degree of glory to another. In this he distinguishes a triple degree of knowledge in Christ’s disciples. The first is from the clarity of natural knowledge to the clarity of the knowledge of faith. The second is from the clarity of the knowledge of the Old Testament to the clarity of the knowledge of the grace of the New Testament. The third is from the clarity of natural knowledge and of the Old and New Testaments to the clarity of eternal vision: “Though our outer nature is wasting away, our inner nature is being renewed every day” (2 Cor. 4:16). But how does this come about? Not by the letter of the law, but from the Lord who is the Spirit: “For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God” (Rom. 8:14); “Let your good Spirit lead me on a level path” (Ps. 143:10).
