# Lecture 7 — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote33" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote33); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote33\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — “And, if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you; he that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead shall quicken also your mortal bodies, because of his Spirit that dwelleth in you” (Rom. 8: 11). — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote34" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote34); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote34\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — Dionysius, [starting from the highest] and going down, places the Dominions as first in the Middle Hierarchy, the Virtues second, and the Powers third. In the first rank of the Lower Hierarchy he puts the Principalities, second are the Archangels and third are the Angels. This listing of the ranks is in accord with the present text where the Apostle begins, in an ascending order, from the first rank of Hierarchy, the seventh [down from the Seraphim]. — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote35" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote35); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote35\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — for the present we will follow Dionysius’ approach since it accords with the text at hand. — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote36" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote36); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote36\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote37" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote37); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote37\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — Therefore, the governance of reality in relation to God pertains to the First Hierarchy. On this account, the ranks of that hierarchy are named with reference to God. The Seraphim are so called because they are burning with love and through it are united to God. The Cherubim are, as it were, radiant inasmuch as they possess a supereminent knowledge of divine mysteries. The Thrones are so termed inasmuch as in them God carries out his judgments. Of these three ranks the Apostle makes no mention here. — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote38" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote38); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote38\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — In asserting every name that is named he lets us know that the exaltation is above every substance which can be known and comprehended by a name. I say this to exclude the substance of Divinity which is incomprehensible; so a Gloss remarks that above every name means everything that can be named.

19b According to the operation of the might of his power, 20 Which he wrought in Christ, raising him up from the dead and setting him on his right hand in the heavenly places, 21 Above all principality and power and virtue and dominion and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come.

Once he has listed the blessings which he hopes will be granted to the Ephesians in the future (1:16 ff.), the Apostle discusses the exemplar and form of those benefits. As the life of Christ is the model and form of our justice, so Christ’s glory and exultation is the form and exemplar of our glory and exaltation. Here the Apostle makes two points:

First, he proposes in a general manner the form of our exaltation with its blessings and gifts.

Secondly, he discusses it in detail (1:20b ff.).

The divine activity in Christ is the form and exemplar of the divine activity in us. In reference to this he states according to the operation, that is, in the likeness of the operation, of the might of his power, meaning the virtuous power of God, which he wrought in Christ exalting him who is the head. Understand that in this way he will mightily act in us. “We await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who will transfigure our wretched body to be like his glorious body by the power which enables him to subject all things to himself” (Phil. 3:20-21). In Scripture we frequently read that we will be exalted in the likeness of Christ’s exaltation. For example, Romans 8 (17): “...provided we suffer with him, so as also to be glorified with him.” Or the Apocalypse 3 (21): “He who conquers I will grant him to sit with me in my throne; as I myself have conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne.”

As a result, he specifies the form and exemplar in more detail, showing what pertains to the exaltation of Christ while speaking of him inasmuch as he is man (v. 20b ff.). He writes of three favors in the exaltation of Christ:

First, the transition from death to life, by raising him up from the dead.

Secondly, the exaltation to the utmost heights of glory, setting him on his right hand... (1:20b-21).

Thirdly, an elevation to the greatest of power, and he hath subjected all things under his feet... (1:22-23).

Concerning the first he states that it was according to the operation which God the Father wrought in Christ by the same power which he shares with Christ. Christ both restored himself to life and was restored to life by the Father.

Setting him on his right hand refers to the second [element in Christ’s exaltation]. This height of glory can be viewed in three perspectives: in its relation to God, to material creatures, and to spiritual creatures. Considered in relation to God, he is seated at his right hand; this is not to be thought of as a bodily organ—“God is a Spirit” (Jn. 4:24)—but as a metaphorical way of speaking. The right hand is taken as a nobler and stronger part of man; so when we say that Christ Jesus is seated at the right hand of God, it should be understood that according to his humanity he partakes of the Father’s choicest blessings, and according to his divinity it is understood as equality with the Father. “Yahweh spoke to my lord: Take the throne at my right” (Ps. 109: 1); and the last chapter of Mark (16:19): “And the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven and sat on the right hand of God.”

In heavenly places defines Christ’s relation to material creatures. For the heavenly bodies occupy the highest place in comparison to the other bodies; yet, “He who descended is he who also ascended above all the heavens” (Eph. 4:10). In relation to spiritual creatures, he first mentions that Christ is exalted over certain specific ones, and secondly, over all of them generally (1:21b).

To understand this, note that there are nine ranks of angels, of which the Apostle here (1:21a) mentions only the four middle ranks. Above these are the three superior ranks of the Thrones, Cherubim and Seraphim. Below them are the two lower ranks of the Archangels and the Angels. These nine ranks are also differentiated into three hierarchies, or sacred authorities [ *principatus* ], each of which embraces three ranks.

All the doctors agree in assigning the ranks of the First Hierarchy. The highest rank is the Seraphim, second are the Cherubim, third are the Thrones. In assigning the ranks among the Middle and Lower Hierarchies, however, Dionysius and Gregory disagree.

Gregory, on the other hand, arranges them differently. He places the Principalities between the Dominions and the Powers, which is the second rank of the Middle Hierarchy; while he puts the Virtues between the Powers and the Archangels, which is the first rank of the Lower Hierarchy. This arrangement is supported by the Apostle’s words in Colossians 1 (16): “For in him [Christ] were all things created in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers,” where he enumerates those ranks in a descending order. Reserving Gregory’s classification until we lecture on the letter to the Colossians,

To understand this, it should be realized that the structure of reality can be considered in three ways:

First, according as it is present in the First Cause of everything’ God.

Secondly, according as it is in the universal causes.

Thirdly, according to the arrangement of individual causes.

Since everything that happens among creatures occurs with the assistance of the angels, the three angelic hierarchies are distinguished according to the threefold way of conceiving the structure of reality. To one it belongs to grasp the intelligible patterns of things in the very summit of reality, God; it pertains to another to grasp the intelligible patterns of reality in the universal causes; while still another [understands these patterns] in the individual causes. For the higher the angelic minds are, the more do they receive divine illumination with greater universality.

To the Middle Hierarchy belongs the governance of things in relation to the universal causes. Hence the ranks of this hierarchy have names associated with power since the universal causes are present in the lower and individual things by their energy and power. Three tasks pertain to these powers which govern universally. First, some must give direction by their commands; secondly, others must dispose of any impediments to the fulfillment [of those commands]; thirdly, some must arrange how others will carry out the commands. Of these, the first belongs to the Dominions who, as Dionysius remarks, are free from any subordination; nor are they sent out on external [missions] but they give orders to those who are sent. The second pertains to the Virtues who facilitate the execution of the commands. The third belongs to the Powers who carry out the commands.

On the Lower Hierarchy devolves the guidance of things in relation to individual causes, and they are named from the [classes of objects] consigned to them. Hence, those called Angels carry out what pertains to the salvation of individual persons. The salvation and utility of greater personages is entrusted to the Archangels. Principalities is the name of those who preside over each of the provinces.

Christ is above all of these ranks that have been discussed. The Apostle only makes a special mention of four of them. The reason is that the names of these four ranks are given them for their dignity, and since he is dealing with the dignity of Christ, he names them especially to show that Christ surpasses all created dignity.

Consequently, when he says and above every name that is named, he teaches that Christ has been exalted above every spiritual creature in general. He had stated previously that Christ was exalted above all the spiritual creatures whose names were related to power. However, in Sacred Scripture, besides those ranks of angels, other ranks of celestial spirits are mentioned; for instance, the Seraphim (Is. 6), Cherubim (Ez. 10, 11 and 41), and Thrones (Psalms), which be did not speak of. Therefore, he shows that Christ, as man, is exalted above all of these ranks by adding above every name that is named... [He surpasses] not only those who exercise authority but everything capable of being named.

For it should be recognized that a name is given to understand the object [referred to]; it signifies the object’s substance when what the name designates is the precise intelligibility of the object.

Not only in this world, but also in that which is to come is added because there are many facts in this life that we grasp through knowledge and which we name, whereas those of the future life cannot be comprehended or named: “We know in part; and we prophesy in part” (1 Cor. 13:9). Nevertheless, the blessed in the future life do name these latter; they are those realities of which the Apostle says in 2 Corinthians 12 (4), that “he heard things that cannot be told, which man may not utter.” Yet Christ is even exalted above these. “He gave him a name which is above all names” (Phil. 2:9).
