# Lecture 4 — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote10" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote10); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote10\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — that they are to be all the more perfect. ‘Wherefore, leaving the word of the beginning of Christ, let us go on to things more perfect; not laying again the foundation of penance from dead works and of faith towards God” (Heb. 6: 1). “The consumption abridged shall overflow with justice. For the Lord God of hosts shall make a consumption, and an abridgment in the midst of all the land” (Is. 10:22).

> 11 And he gave some apostles, and some prophets, and other some evangelists, and other some pastors and doctors; 12 For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; 13 Until we all meet into the unity of faith and of the knowlege of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ.

Here the Apostle expounds what was mentioned earlier (4:9) about the bestowal of gifts. Concerning this he makes two points:

First, he shows that the Lord has imparted a variety of gifts on each of the faithful.

Secondly, he indicates the utility and fruitfulness of these gifts (4:13).

The many different states and functions in the Church are designated as the gifts of Christ. Consider how, among the gifts of Christ, the Apostles are conceded the first place: And he gave some Apostles. “And he chose twelve of them whom also he named apostles” (Lk. 6:13). “God indeed hath set some in the church; first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly doctors; after that miracles...” (1 Cor. 12:28).

Apostles are put first because they had a privileged share in all of Christs gifts. They possessed a plenitude of grace and wisdom regarding the revelation of divine mysteries. Christ “opened their understanding that they might understand the scriptures” (Lk. 24:45). “To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God” (Mk. 4:11). “Because all things, whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I have made known to you” (Jn. 15:15). They also possessed an ample ability to speak convincingly in order to proclaim the gospel. I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to resist and gainsay” (Lk. 21:15). “Go ye unto the whole world and preach the gospel to every creature” (Mk. 16:15). Moreover, they also had an exceptional authority and power for looking after the Lord’s flock. “Feed my sheep” (Jn. 21:17). “For if also I should boast somewhat more of our power, which the Lord hath given us unto edification and not for your destruction, I should not be ashamed” (2 Cor. 10: 8).

Therefore, the Apostle adds three ecclesiastical categories according as they share in each of the foregoing. Related to the revelation of divine mysteries he annexes and some prophets who foretold the incarnation of Christ. Of them 1 Peter 1 (10) declares: “Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and diligently searched, who prophesied of the glory to come in you.” “For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John” (Mt. 11:13). But after Christ came, the apostles became the prophets of the joy of the life to come. “Blessed is he that readeth and heareth the words of this prophecy, and keepeth those things which are written in it; for the time is at hand” (Apoc. 1:3). They also became the interpreters of what the ancient prophets had foretold. “Be zealous for spiritual gifts; but rather that you may prophesy” (1 Cor. 14:1). “Behold I send to you prophets and wise men and scribes; and some of them you will put to death” (Mt. 23:34).

Relative to the proclamation of the gospel he adds some evangelists. They had the duty of preaching the good news, and even of writing it down although they were not among the principal apostles. “How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, of them that bring glad tidings of good things!” (Rom. 10:15). “To Jerusalem I will give an evangelist” (Is. 41:27).

In reference to the care of the Church he says some pastors who are responsible for the Lord’s flock. Under the same heading he adds and doctors to bring out how the pastor’s specific task in the Church is to instruct the people in what pertains to faith and good conduct. The administration of temporalities does not belong to bishops, who are the successors of the Apostles, but rather to deacons. “It is not reasonable that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables” (Ac. 6:2). “Embracing that faithful word which is according to doctrine, that he may be able to exhort in sound doctrine” (Tit. 1:9). The words of Jeremias 3 (15) apply to bishops: “I will give you pastors according to my own heart, and they shall feed you with knowledge and doctrine.”

Next (v. 12), he discloses the fruitful results of these gifts or functions. Concerning this he does two things:

First, he speaks of their fruit.

Secondly, he explains how the faithful may attain to this fruit (4:14).

The first section has two divisions also:

First, he sets down their immediate result.

Secondly, their ultimate fruit (4:13).

The proximate effects of the above mentioned gifts or functions are threefold. First, consider those who are placed in these functions; spiritual gifts are communicated to them that they might be at the service of God and their fellow man. Thus he states for the work of the ministry which offers honor to God and salvation to one’s fellow men. “Let a man so account of us as of the ministers of Christ and the dispensers of the mysteries of God” (I Cor. 4:1). “You shall be called the priests of the Lord; to you it shall be said: Ye ministers of our God” (Is. 61:6).

Secondly, consider the perfection of those who already believe; so be says for the perfecting of the saints, that is, of those already sanctified through faith in Christ. Prelates must be especially anxious to lead those intrusted to them toward the state of perfection. This is why Dionysius claims, in his *Ecclesiastica Hierarchia*,

A third [immediate effect] is the conversion of the unbelievers. About this he states for the edifying of the body of Christ. When the infidels are converted, Christ’s Church—which is his body—is built up. Whoever preaches “speaketh to men unto edification and exhortation and comfort” (1 Cor. 14:3). “For greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues; unless perhaps he interpret, that the church may receive edification... So you also, forasmuch as you are zealous of spirits, seek to abound unto the edifying of the church” (1 Cor. 14:5,12).

He goes on (v. 13) to discuss the ultimate fruit [of the Church’s preaching] which can be understood in two ways. One sees it as touching on the absolutely ultimate effect: the resurrection of the saints. In this perspective two facts are asserted. First is the spiritual and corporeal convergence [ *congregatio* ] of all who have risen. The physical convergence will consist in this, that all the saints will be drawn together toward Christ: “Wheresoever the body shall be, there shall the eagles also be gathered together” (Mt. 24:28).

The spiritual convergence, however, is seen in relation to our merits, which is according to the same faith; regarding this he says into the unity of faith. There is only “one Lord, one faith” (Eph. 4:5). Again he said earlier: “Careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace” (Eph. 4:3). The knowledge of the Son of God is the reward, it consists in the perfect vision and knowledge of God of which 1 Corinthians 13 (12) speaks: “Then shall I know even as I am known.” “And they shall teach no more every man his neigbbour, and every man his brother, saying: Know the Lord; for all shall know me from the least of them even to the greatest” (Jer. 31:34).

Secondly, he discusses the aforementioned fruit in respect to the perfection of those who rise. He relates first of all the perfection itself when he says unto a perfect man. This should not be understood as though women will be changed into men at the resurrection—some have misread it in such a fashion. Both sexes will remain, though sexual intercourse will no longer occur, as our Lord indicates in Matthew 22 (30): “For in the resurrection they shall neither marry nor be married, but shall be as the angels of God in heaven.” [They will remain as a witness] to the perfection of nature, and for the glory of God who created such a nature. The perfect man designates the complete and total perfection of that state. “When that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away” (1 Cor. 13:10). Thus man is used here rather in contradistinction to boy than as the opposite of woman.

He describes, in the second place, the exemplar of this perfection when he says unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ. Consider how the true physical body of Christ is the exemplar of his mystical body. Both are made up of many members joined into a unified whole. Now the physical body of Christ grew to the mature and robust age of thirty-three years before he died. Therefore, the age of the risen saints, who will experience neither imperfection nor the failings of old age, will correspond to that mature age. “He will reform the body of our lowness, made like to the body of his glory” (Phil. 3:21).

In another way [this passage, v. 13] can be understood as referring to the ultimate fruit [of the Churchs ministry] in the present life. This will happen when all the faithful come to her in the unity of faith and the knowledge of the truth. “And other sheep I have that are not of this fold; them also I must bring. And they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold and one shepherd” (Jn. 10:16). In this the mystical body is perfected spiritually in a manner similar to [the physical perfection of] Chrises natural body. In this perspective, the whole body of the Church is termed a manly body, following the metaphor used by the Apostle in Galatians 4 (1): “Now, I say: As long as the heir is a child, he differeth nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all.”
