# Lecture 1 — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote1" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote1); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote1\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — “You should walk worthy of God, in all things pleasing” (Col. 1:10); “let your conversation be worthy of the gospel of Christ” (Phil. 1:27). And why? Because “he hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light” (1 Pet. 2:9). — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote2" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote2); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote2\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — This is achieved when each possesses what is proper to himself. For this reason he says in the bond of peace. “God hath placed peace in thy borders” (Ps. 147:14). Peace in its turn is maintained by justice: “And the work of justice shall be peace” (Is. 32:17). “Be not grieved with her bands” (Ecclus. 6:26). Why? Because “in her is the beauty of life: and her bands are a healthful binding” (*ibid.* v. 31). — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote3" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote3); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote3\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — Because the Apostle speaks of the Church’s unity after the fashion of the unity found in man, he adds one body as if to say: Be united in the bond of peace that you may be one body—this regards the first type of unity—all the faithful should be ordered among themselves as members making up a single body. “We, being many, are one body in Christ; and every one members one of another” (Rom. 12:5). And one spirit —referring to the second [type of unity in man]—that you might possess a spiritual consensus through the unity of your faith and charity. — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote4" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote4); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote4\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — “Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly vocation” (Heb. 3:1), “consider your vocation” (1 Cor. 1:26). If anyone asks: Who will call us? And to what? 1 Peter 5 (10) replies: “The God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory in Christ Jesus” where your true happiness is. “Blessed are they that are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb” (Apoc. 19:9).

> 1 I, therefore, a prisoner in the Lord, beseech you that you walk worthy of the vocation in which you are called; 2 With all humility and mildness, with patience, supporting one another in charity; 3 Careful to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; 4 One body and one spirit; as you are called in one hope of your calling.

The Apostle recalled above the divine blessings through which the Church’s unity has originated and been preserved (Ch. 1-3). Now he admonishes the Ephesians to remain within this ecclesial unity. Regarding this he does two things:

First, he exhorts them to persevere in unity.

Secondly, he instructs them how to remain in it (4:17).

The first section is again divided into two parts:

First, he cautions them to keep ecclesial unity.

Secondly, he sets forth the pattern of this Church unity (4:5 ff.).

The first part has three divisions:

First, he offers certain incentives to maintain ecclesial unity.

Secondly, he sets down an admonition (4:2).

Thirdly, he shows the purpose of his admonition (4:3).

Three incentives are given for them to maintain the Church’s unity. First is the devotedness of Paul’s love, second is the remembrance of his chains, and third is the consideration of the divine favors.

The affection of his love is intimated by his entreaty. Therefore because you have obtained so many blessings from the Lord, I beseech you. I do not command you even though I could; on account of my lowliness I do not command but plead with you. Proverbs 18 (23) remarks: “The poor will speak with supplications.” Charity is another reason [for such a procedure], it prompts men to action more than fear: “Wherefore, though I have much confidence in Christ Jesus to command thee that which is to the purpose, for charity’s sake I rather beseech” (Phm. 1:8). He stirs them by recalling his chains: I, a prisoner in the Lord. With these words he urges them to remain united, giving them three motives.

First, a friend sympathizes with a suffering friend and more readily tries to fulfill his wishes so that be might thereby console him. “A friend shall not be known in prosperity, and an enemy shall not be hidden in adversity. In the prosperity of a man, his enemies are grieved; and a friend is known in his adversity” (Ecclus. 12:8-9).

Secondly, the Apostle himself suffers imprisonment for their own utility. Hence he urges them to remember this, as though he wanted to put them under certain obligations. “Now, whether we be in tribulation, it is for your exhortation and salvation; or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation; or whether we be exhorted, it is for your exhortation and salvation, which worketh the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer” (2 Cor. 1:6).

Thirdly, as was mentioned previously in Chapter Three (v. 13) where he writes “my tribulations for you, which is your glory,” these sufferings were for the Ephesians’ own immense glory. For God exposed his own chosen friends to adversities in behalf of their salvation. Therefore he adds in the Lord which means, on account of the Lord. Or, he annexes in the Lord since it was the Apostle’s glory to be imprisoned, not as a thief or murderer, but as a Christian and for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, in accordance with Ezechiel 3 (25): “And thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee, and they shall bind thee with them: and thou shalt not go forth from the midst of them.”

He also stimulates them by a consideration of the divine blessings: that you walk worthy of the vocation in which you are called. You should be attentive to the dignity to which you are summoned, you ought to behave in a way conformable to it. If someone had been chosen to a rank of nobility in a kingdom, it would be an indignity for him to perform peasant work. Hence the Apostle warns the Ephesians, as though he said: You are called to be fellow citizens with the saints of God’s household (cf. Eph. 2:19), henceforth it is unworthy of you to engage in earthly affairs or worry about worldly matters.

Subsequently, when he says with all humility and mildness, with patience, supporting one another in charity, he expresses the way [to fulfill] his admonition, teaching them how they can behave in a worthy manner. Four virtues must be cultivated, and their four opposite vices shunned.

The first vice which he rejects is pride. When one arrogant person decides to rule others, while the other proud individuals do not want to submit, dissension arises in the society and peace disappears. Whence Proverbs 13 (10): “Among the proud there are always contentions.” To eliminate this he says with all interior and exterior humility. “The greater thou art, the more humble thyself in all things: and thou shalt find grace before God” (Ecclus. 3:20); “let nothing be done through contention, neither by vain glory; but in humility, let each esteem others better than themselves” (Phil. 2:3). “God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble” (Jas. 4:6).

Anger is the second vice. For an angry person is inclined to inflict injury, whether verbal or physical, from which disturbances occur. “A passionate man stirreth up strifes: he that is patient appeaseth those who are stirred up” (Prov. 15:18). To discard it he says with all mildness; this softens arguments and preserves peace. “To the meek he will give grace” (Prov. 3:34); “The meek shall inherit the land” (Ps. 36:11). “My son, do thy works in meekness: and thou shalt be beloved above the glory of men” (Ecclus. 3:19).

The third is impatience. Occasionally, someone who himself is humble and meek, refraining from causing trouble, nevertheless will not endure patiently the real or attempted wrongs done to himself. Therefore, he adds with patience in adversities. Patience hath a perfect work” (Jas. 1:4), “in thy humiliation keep patience” (Ecclus. 2:4). “For patience is necessary for you; that, doing the will of God, you may receive the promise” (Heb. 10: 36).

An inordinate zeal is the fourth vice. Inordinately zealous about everything, men will pass judgment on whatever they see. Not waiting for the proper time and place [to voice their criticisms], a turmoil arises in society. “If you bite and devour one another, take heed that you be not consumed one of another” (Gal. 5:15). Hence he says supporting one another in charity; mutually bearing with the defects of others out of charity. When someone falls he should not be immediately corrected—unless it is the time and the place for it. With mercy these should be waited for since “charity beareth all things” (1 Cor. 13:7). Not that these failings are tolerated out of negligence or consent, nor from familiarity or carnal friendship, but from charity. “Bear ye one another’s burdens; and so you shall fulfull the law of Christ” (Gal. 6:2). “Now, we that are stronger ought to bear the infirmities of the weak” (Rom. 15:1).

After this he shows the purpose of his admonition which is to maintain unity among the faithful. Three points are made:

First, he sets forth the unity itself which is the goal (4:3a).

Secondly, he describes bow the unity is kept (4:3b-4a).

Thirdly, he expresses the reason for preserving this unity (4:4b).

First of all he remarks: You ought to walk worthy of your calling and be careful to keep the unity of the spirit. Two types of unity exist. One whose purpose is to commit evil; it is wicked and might be called a unity of the flesh. “Of one spark cometh a great fire, and of one deceitful man much blood” (Ecclus. 11:34). The other is a unity of the spirit; it is good and its purpose is to do good. “Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!” (Ps. 132: 1). “That they may be one, as we also are” (Jn. 17:11).

The way to continue in this unity is through the bond of peace. For charity is a union of souls. Now the fusion of material objects cannot last unless it is held by some bond. Similarly, the union of souls through love will not endure unless it is bound. Peace proves to be a true bond; that peace which is, according to Augustine, the balanced harmony between the measure, form, and order of a thing.

Now in man there is a twofold unity. The first is the ordered structure of the organs among themselves, the second is the union of the body and the soul constituting what neither are separately.

Or: one body designates a unity with other men, and one spirit union with God; because “he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit” (I Cor. 6:17).

Next, when he says as you are called in one hope of your calling he points out the reason for this unity. We notice that when persons are called together to possess something in common and mutually enjoy it, they usually live and travel together. Thus, in a spiritual way he says: Because you are called to one and the same reality, namely, the final reward, you ought to walk together with a unity of spirit in the one hope of your calling, tending toward the one reality you hope for as a result of your vocation.
