# Lecture 8 — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote24" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote24); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote24\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

> 25 Wherefore, putting away lying, speak ye the truth, every man with his neighbour; for we are members one of another. 26 Be angry, and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your anger. 27 Give not place to the devil.

Having set down above the general admonition to put on a newness of life (4:17), now the Apostle determines on the particular precepts. Concerning this he does two things:

First, he restrains them from committing interior sins which corrupt the spirit.

Secondly, he prohibits exterior sins which corrupt the flesh (5:3).

The first has two divisions:

First, he forbids sins which consist in one’s personal deordination.

Secondly, then sins which consist in the deordination of others (4:29).

The first section again is divided into three parts since he forbids:

First, sin corrupting man’s rational powers.

Secondly, sin deordinating his irascible emotions (4:26).

Thirdly, sin pertaining to the concupiscible emotions (4:28).

Regarding the first of these he does three things. First, he forbids one of them; then he urges its opposite [virtue]; thirdly, he gives his reason. Hence, he first prohibits what is characteristic of the old man, thereby expounding what he said above (v. 24): “Put on the new man.” To accomplish this he first bans lying because through this sin of the tongue the truth of reason is corrupted. Wherefore to put on the new man you should be putting away lying, for “Thou [O Lord] wilt destroy all that speak a lie” (Ps. 5:7) maliciously.

Then he urges them on to newness of life, saying with Zacharias (8:16) speak ye the truth, every man with his neighbor. And why? Because we are members of one another. For members are to love and mutually assist one another in truth. “We, being many, are one body in Christ; and every one members one of another” (Rom. 12:5).

When forbidding sins destructive of the order in the irascible emotions, be makes three points:

First, he gives a warning.

Secondly, he explains.what he means (4:26b).

Thirdly, he gives the reason for his concern (4:27).

He gives his warning when he says Be angry, and sin not. This is susceptible of two interpretations; for there are two types of anger, a good one and an evil one. Anger is evil when, contrary to justice, it strives inordinately for revenge. It is good when it seeks a just vindication, namely, when the person is vexed at the time, with whom, and to the degree that, he should be. The [above warning] is applicable to both. If it concerns evil anger, the sense is that he does not command it but permits it. As though he said: Should it happen that anger wells up within you—which is human enough—do not sin. You must not be led on to perform [what the inordinate passion craves] through consenting to it. “Let no temptation take hold on you, but such as is human” (1 Cor. 10:13). For, without doubt, whoever is angered against his brother in any other way “shall be in danger of the judgment” (Mt. 5:22). Joseph counselled his brothers against such anger: “Be not angry in the way” (Gen. 45:24).

If it is interpreted concerning righteous anger it is not simply permitted, like the first, but imperative. Be angry against your sins, for man desires a twofold vindication. One regarding himself when he sins, so that penance becomes a certain type of vindication which man inflicts and receives in himself. Such a wrath is good, and with respect to it the imperative is used: be angry against your sins, and sin not any more, nor commit those types of sin with which you must again be exasperated.

Now, some are doubtless of the opinion that a man can be mad at himself for his own sins safely, but that this does not hold true concerning his neighbors and their sins. This is false; a man can be mad at himself for his own sins, and at his fellow man because of his sins. Therefore, zealously be angry at other people’s offenses. “Phinees hath turned away my wrath from the children of Israel because he was moved with my zeal against them” (Num. 25:11). And Elias said: ‘With zeal have I been zealous for the Lord God of Hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant” (3 Kg. 19:10). By following the dictates of reason, rather than acting before [reason has had time to reflect], you sin not. “Let every man be swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to anger” (Jas. 1:19).

In Let not the sun go down upon your anger he explains what he had said, and the explanation can be interpreted according to the three above expositions. If it concerns evil anger, then he would be saying: Do not nurture seeds of wrath, cast them off before sunset; for although the first impulses of temper are excusable, due to human frailty, it is illicit to dwell on them.

In reference to good anger, as it is directed against one’s personal sins, the sun is Christ. “Unto you that fear my name the sun of justice shall arise” (Mal. 4:2) Let not it go down upon your anger, that is, on your sins, on account of which you must be angered again and punish yourselves. When the sins of others are in question the sun refers to reason. “Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the time of affliction come, and the years draw nigh of which thou shalt say: They please me not; before the sun... is darkened” (Eccl. 12:1). The sun should not set on your anger, that is, the dictates of reason must not be clouded over. “Anger indeed killeth the foolish” (Job 5:2).

The reason for the warning is indicated in Give not place to the devil. The devil gains entrance to us either through sin or consent to it. “The devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray him” (Jn. 13:2), after which it says: “After the morsel, Satan entered into him” (*ibid.* 27). Passions of this kind easily pull one’s consent [toward their desires], especially when they have biased the judgment of reason. Anger particularly does this since it involves the rapid, raising of blood, the speed of whose movement precedes any rational judgment. Excited like this, the devil wins a foothold within us; thus he says give not place to the devil. You ought not to persist, he seems to say, in your ill temper, for you will only invite the demon who is himself continually angered. God is “my deliverer from my infuriated enemies” (Ps. 17:48). “The devil is come down unto you, having great wrath” (Apoc. 12:12). He cannot accomplish this, at least in the soul of a just man. But this justice is forfeited through anger: “For the anger of man worketh not the justice of God” (Jas. 1:20). If you do not want to give Satan a place, at least in your soul, do not let the sun set on your wrath. “Remove anger from thy heart” (Eccl. 11:10).
