# Chapter 5 — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote15" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote15); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote15\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — He could be made the subject of a discourse on Ecclesiasticus 31 (29) “The testimony of his wickedness is true.” Second, its methods are by cunning craftiness to mean one thing and pretend to hold some other opinion. On this account the Apostle wrote the Corinthians: “I fear lest, as the serpent seduced Eve by his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted and fall from the simplicity that is in Christ” (2 Cor. 11:3). Third, this is also evident from its effects, for such doctrine lies in wait to deceive. Its teachers seduce and lie in wait, not to rob money or temporal goods, but to spread errors. “Evil men and seducers shall grow worse and worse; erring, and driving into error” (2 Tim. 3:13). — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote16" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote16); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote16\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — Any good work is at times referred to as truth, for instance, Tobias 1 (2): “Even in his captivity he forsook not the way of truth.” Let us, therefore, do the truth, namely, every good work. Or, put true doctrine into practice since it is not enough simply to hear or teach the truth, it must be acted on as well. Thus the Apostle counsels Timothy: “Take heed to thyself and to doctrine; be earnest in them. For in doing this thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee” (1 Tim. 4:16). “Be ye doers of the word and not hearers only” (Jas. 1:22) since “doers shall be justified” (Rom. 2:13). That is, if they act out of charity, the form of good works. “Do manfully and be strengthened. Let all your actions be done in charity” (1 Cor. 16:13-14); otherwise they will be useless: “If I should distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if I should deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing” (1 Cor. 13:3). — if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote17" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote17); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote17\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); } — “Thou hast wrought all our works for us” (Is. 26:12). He is the “same God who worketh all in all” (1 Cor. 12:6). This interpretation accords with that of the Glossator.

14 That henceforth we be no more children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the wickedness of men, by cunning craftiness by which they lie in wait to deceive; 15 But, doing the truth in charity, we may in all things grow up in him who is the head, even Christ; 16 From whom the whole body, being compacted and fitly joined together, by what every joint supplieth, according to the operation ‘in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body, unto the edifying of itself in charity.

Having spoken of the diversity of spiritual gifts and their fruit (4:12), now the Apostle describes bow we attain to that fruit. Concerning this he does two things:

First, he removes two obstacles.

Secondly, he teaches the way of gaining access to them (4:15).

It was stated well, he says, that the ultimate fruit of these gifts is for us to meet the Lord as a “Perfect man unto the measure of the age of Christ.” We are obliged henceforth to cease being children and become mature men; for as long as a person is a boy he is not a perfect man. Whoever is to meet the Lord must leave his childhood behind. The Apostle did just that: “When I became a man, I put away the things of a child” (1 Cor. 13:11). It is a quality of the child never to be fixed or determinate in anything, he rather believes whatever is told him. To act like grown men we have to abandon a fickle oscillation and instability in our judgments. “Do not become children mentally; in malice be children but in your mind be mature” (1 Cor. 14:20). Those who waver are called such from the word “wave”; like a wave tossed to and fro they are not firm in the faith. “He that wavereth is like a wave of the sea, which is moved and carried about by the wind” (Jas. 1:6). But now it is imperative for us to stand firm and not fluctuate.

Evil teachings are like the wind Proverbs 25 (23) speaks of with merit: “The north wind brings forth rain.” “And the rain fell, and the floods came and the winds blew; and they beat upon that house. And it fell; and great was the fall thereof” (Mt. 7:27). Hence he warns against being carried about with every wind of doctrine. As though he said: We must not be shaken by these wicked doctrines that buff about seeking to agitate hearts and ruin spiritual accomplishments. Three qualities demonstrate that it is not good doctrine.

First, its source is from the wickedness of men. Not being sound doctrine, but false and wicked, someone will concoct dogmas out of it in order to wield dominion over others, even though souls are lost. Such were the teachings of that most wicked Arius whose abdomen burst asunder [at his death].

Having pointed out the impediments [of immaturity and erroneous doctrine] which prevent one from acquiring the fruit of spiritual gifts, he discloses here how that fruit can be attained. He argues this way: It was said just now that to obtain the fruit of these spiritual gifts we must stop being children and grow up into mature adults. As long as we are childish we have not reached a mature state, neither do we grow. Hence, it is necessary for us to grow up. This is what be says about doing the truth in charity where he makes two points:

First, in what areas we ought to grow up.

Secondly, through whom [we are to grow] (4:15b).

With respect to the first he states doing the truth in charity we may grow up in good works and the form of good works, which two are truth and charity.

Because not to make progress in the approach to God is itself a retrogression, the Apostle adds that we may grow up in him, (v. 15b) where be states three points by explaining:

First, the author of our development.

Secondly, the truth about him (4:16a).

Thirdly, the manner of the development (4:16b).

He asks that we may grow up in him, namely, in Christ, of whom 1 Peter 2 (2) declares: “In him may you grow unto salvation.” In him, I repeat, who is the head, Christ, and in the Church which is his body (cf. Col. 1:24). Let us increase, not in wealth as was said of Job that “his possession hath increased on the earth” (Job 1:10), but in spiritual goods. Nor in one area only, but in all things, that is, being fruitful and increasing in every good. “Whatsoever else you do, do all to the glory of God... As I also in all things please all men” (1 Cor. 10:31, 33). The Apostle commends the Corinthians on this score: “Now, I praise you, brethren, that in all things you are mindful of me and keep my ordinances as I have delivered them to you” (1 Cor. 11:2).

Next (v. 16b), he speaks about the truth of Christ through whom we ought to grow. Three points concerning an organic body are to be kept in mind: its organs are interrelated, they are bound together by tendons, each member serves the rest. “If the foot should say: because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? And if the ear should say: because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? If the whole body were the eye, where would be the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where would be the smelling?” (1 Cor. 12:15-17). Therefore, one body is composed of many members in these three ways: through its structured whole or unity, through its connective bindings, and through its reciprocal actions and assistance, just as all these actions of interrelating organs, the connecting of tendons, and movements take their initiative from the body’s head, so the spiritual counterparts of these flow from Christ, our head, into his body, the Church.

First, there is a structured unity through faith. Whence he says from Christ who is our head, as was already mentioned, the whole body, being compacted is joined together in a unity. “He will gather together the dispersed of Israel” (Ps. 146:2). “He will gather together unto him all nations, and heap together unto him all people” (Hab. 2:5). Christ is “the head, from which the whole body, by joints and bands, being supplied with nourishment and compacted, groweth unto the increase of God” (Col. 2:19).

Second, a connecting and binding force emanates from Christ, the head, into his body, the Church, since whatever is united must be held together or bound by some nexus or bond. On this account he says fitly joined together, by what every joint supplieth, that is, through the faith and charity which unite and knit the members of the mystical body to one another for their mutual support. “All the works of the Lord are good: and he will furnish every work in due time” (Ecclus. 39:39). Thus the Apostle himself, confident of this mutual being-of-service which reigns among the members of the Church due to the divine unifying action, had said: “I know that this shall happen to me unto salvation, through your prayer and the assistance of the Spirit of Jesus Christ” (Phil. 1:19).

Third, from Christ the head there is infused into his members the power to act in order that they may grow spiritually. For this reason he states according to the operation in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body. As if he said: Not only is the structured unity of the members of the Church through faith, and their connection or being joined together through the mutual service of charity, from Christ the head. Indeed, from him comes the actual operation or movements of the members needed for action, and this according to the measure and competency of each member. Thus he asserts that Christ accomplishes the increase of the body according to the operation and in the due measure of every part. Therefore, the body not only grows through the faith which compacts it into a structured whole and through charity’s mutual assistance, but also through the actual binding force which flows out from each member according to the degree of grace given him; and also through the actual impulse to act which God effects in us.

But why does God make each member grow? To build up the body. “In whom all the building, being framed together, groweth up into an holy temple in the Lord. In whom you also are built together into an habitation of God in the Spirit” (Eph. 2:21-22). So 1 Corinthians 3 (9) affirms that “you are God’s building.” All this occurs in the charity of which it is said that “charity edifieth” (1 Cor. 8:1). Or, in charity refers to the purely gratuitous love with which God accomplishes all this. “Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore have I drawn thee, taking pity on thee. And I will build thee again, and thou shalt be built” (Jer. 31:3-4). This is what he states in unto the edifying of itself in charity.
