# Chapter 4

> 1. Then Jesus was led by the spirit into the desert, to be tempted by the devil. 2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards he was hungry. 3. And the tempter coming said to him: If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. 4. Who answered and said: It is written, Not in bread alone doth man live, but in every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God. 5. Then the devil took him up into the holy city, and set him upon the pinnacle of the temple, 6. And said to him: If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down, for it is written: That he hath given his angels charge over thee, and in their hands shall they bear thee up, lest perhaps thou dash thy foot against a stone. 7. Jesus said to him: It is written again: Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. 8. Again the devil took him up into a very high mountain, and shewed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. 9. And said to him: All these will I give thee, if falling down thou wilt adore me. 10. Then Jesus saith to him: Begone, Satan: for it is written: The Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and him only shalt thou serve. 11. Then the devil left him; and behold angels came and ministered to him.

It was shown above that Christ prepared himself for preaching by receiving baptism, but now by overcoming temptation. In regard to this he does two things: first, the victory over temptation; secondly, the calling of disciples to hear the doctrine (v. 18).

Regarding the first he does three things: first, he mentions certain preludes to the temptation; secondly, the onslaught of the temptation (v. 3); thirdly, the victory (v. 11).

Three preludes to the temptation are mentioned, namely, the place, the fast and the experience of hunger.

In regard to the first he touches on four things: the time, the place, the leader, and the purpose of the leading.

(1) The time, *Then*, i.e., when the Father's voice had announced him Son of God. In this we are given to understand that temptation is imminent for those made sons of God through baptism: "My son, if you come forward to serve the Lord, prepare yourself for temptation" (Sir 2:1). That desert was between Jerusalem and Jericho, where many were killed: "A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among robbers, who stripped him and beat him and departed, leaving him half dead" (Lk 10:29). And note five reasons why one is tempted after receiving spiritual grace:

First, to receive a test of his rigtheousness: "He that is not tempted, what sort of things does he know?" (Sir 34:10).
Secondly, to repress pride: "To keep me from being too elated by the abundance of revelations, a thorn was given me in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to harass me" (2 Cor 12:7).
Thirdly, to confound the devil, so that he would know that the virtue of Christ is so great that he cannot overcome him. An example of this is found in Job (1:8): "Have you considered my servant Job?
Fourthly, that he might become stronger, as soldiers become stronger through experience: "These are the nations which the Lord left to test Israel by them, that is, all in Israel who had no experience of any war in Canaan" (Jg 3:1).
Fifthly, that he might recognize his dignity, because when the devil attacks anyone, it is an honor, because the devil attacks holy persons: "If the river is turbulent, he is not frightened; he is confident though Jordan rushes against his mouth" (Jb 40:23).

Then the place, *Jesus was led up into the desert*. This befits the preceding and the following, because it was fitting that after the baptism he should go into the desert. This is signified in the Israelites, who, after crossing the Red Sea, which was a figure of baptism, came into the promised land through the desert and wilderness; so the baptized should try to lead a solitary and quiet life by forsaking the world in body or in mind: "I will bring her into the wilderness and speak to her heart" (Hos 2:14); "I would lodge in the wilderness" (Ps 55:7). For it was fitting that after baptism he should go into the desert as to an individual struggle with the devil. Chrysostom: "He went into the desert, who went outside the confines (i.e., the will) of the flesh and of the world, where there is no room for temptation. For how can he be tempted by passion, who is all day with the wife?" But those who do not go out from the will of the flesh and of the devil are not sons of God but children of the devil; they have their own wife but seek another.

But the sons of God, having the Holy Spirit, are led into the desert to be tempted with Christ, of whom he continues: "He was led *by the Spirit*, i.e., Holy. But the one who leads is greater than the one led. Therefore, the Holy Spirit is greater than Christ. I answer that if it is referred to Jesus, in so far as he was Son of God, he is equal to the Holy Spirit. And someone can lead another either by commanding, and then he is greater, or by exhorting, and then he is equal; (Jn 1:40 ff) Andrew led Peter to Jesus; and thus was Jesus led. Hilary refers it to Christ as man, i.e., the Holy Spirit exposes to temptation the man whom he had filled. For men are led by the Holy Spirit, when they are moved by charity in such a way that they are not moved on their own initiative but by another; because they follow the impulse of charity: "The charity of God drives us" (2 Cor 5:14).

In this way the sons of God are driven by the Holy Spirit, so that they pass through the time of this life, which is full of trials; (Jb 7:1): "Man's life on earth is a trial," in victory through Christ. For he willed to be tempted, in order that, as he overcame our death by his, so he would overcome all our temptations by his: "We have not a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin" (Heb 4:15).

[Gregory says the there are three grades of temptation: by suggestion, by taking delight, and by consent. The first is from without, and can be without sin. The second in from within, where sin begins, but it is perfected by consent. The first grade could take place in Christ, but not the other grades. Note that the the devil could not have dared approach Christ to tempt him, unles Christ had first approached him.]

(2) Then the second prelude is given, namely, the fast. *And when he had fasted...*, which suits both the past and the future: the past, because it is fitting for one to fast after baptism, since he should not take his ease after baptism but should exercise himself in good works: "You were called to freedom, brethren" (Gal:13); but through freedom he should not be dedicated to a carnal life. It also befits the future, so that one whom the devil is about to tempt should fast, because "this kind of devil is not cast out save by prayer and fasting" (Mt 17:20). *Forty days*. This is to be taken literally. He adds *and forty nights*, so that no one suppose that it would be lawful to eat at night, as the Saracens do.

It should be noted that this number is prefigured in the Old Testament in Moses and Elijah (Ex 24:18 and 1 Kg 19:8). And a mystery is concealed in this, because such a number arises from ten multiplied by four. Ten signifies the Law, because the whole Law is contained in ten commands. Four signifies the composition of the flesh, because flesh is composed of four elements. Therefore, because we transgress the divine law through the influence of the flesh, it is proper that we afflict our flesh for forty days. According to Gregory, however, this number was established by the Church for fasting, and by it we pay the tenths of the whole year; for from the first Sunday to Easter are thirty-six days of fast; and this is one-tenth of the year with six days left over. And therefore from early times another half-day was added by those who fasted until midnight of Holy Saturday.

The third prelude is added, because *afterward he was hungry*. This is not recorded of Moses and Elijah, who were men; but Christ willed to be hungry to prove that he was human; otherwise, the devil would not have dared to come near to tempt him: "Being born in the likeness of men, and being found in human form" (Phil 2:7).

Then the onslaught of the temptation is presented: first, to gluttony; secondly to vain glory (v. 5); thirdly to ambition (v. 8).

(3) In regard to the first, he does two things: first, he presents the devil's attack; secondly, how Christ responded (v. 4). *And the tempter came and said to him...* For this could be done, so that he would approach Jesus in a bodily form.

And there are three temptations, because God tests to instruct: "God tested Abraham" (Gen 22:1). Man sometimes tests to learn, as the Queen of Sheba tested Solomon (1 Kg 10:1), where it is said of her: "Now when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to test him with hard questions." The devil tests to deceive: "For fear that somehow the tempter had tempted you" (1 Th 3:5). One who wants to test another about knowledge first test him about general matters. But general to the whole human race are vices of the flesh, and especially gluttony. Likewise, one who wishes to attack a camp begins at the weaker part; but man has two parts, the bodily and the spiritual. The devil always tests the weaker side; hence, he first tests for bodily vices, as is clear from our first parents, whom he tested first in regard to gluttony. But the devil's marvelous astuteness in tempting should be noted: *If you are the Son of God*. Thus, he directly tempts about one thing and indirectly about another. Hence, in the first man he persuaded him to eat of the tree, which pertained directly to a bodily sin, namely, gluttony; but secretly he led him into pride and greed, which are spiritual sins. Hence, he said: "You will be as gods": (Gen 3:5). So in the case of Christ, for he had heard that Christ would come into the world and he seemed to be the Son of God. But he had begun to doubt whether this was the one about whom the prophecies had been made, because he found nothing in him: "The ruler of this world is coming. He has no power over me" (Jn 14:30). Hence, he suggested something pleasant to a hungry man. He also induced him to desire things that are God's. And this is, *if you are the Son of God, command these stones to become loaves of bread*: "His word is full of power" (Ec 8:4); "By the word of the Lord the heavens were made and all their host by the breath of his mouth" (Ps 33:6). Therefore, a stone can be changed by his word. Hence, he wanted to incline him to this. If he did it, he would know that he is the Son of God; if not, he would have led him to arrogance. And it should be noted that there are many men who consent to sins of the flesh, thinking that they would not lose their spiritual stature. But if the consenting man were not to lose his spirituality by the matter to which he is tempted, the temptation would be light. This is the way the devil decided to persuade the woman by promising spiritual things.

(4) *But he answered, "It is written": 'Man does not live by bread alone."* In this answer he gives three lessons that must be followed by one being tempted:

first, that he have recourse to the medicine of Scripture: "I have laid up your word in my heart, that I might no sin against you" (Ps 119:11).
The second is that a man do nothing that accords with the devil's strategy. Vegetius: "A wise leader should never do anything that conforms with the enemy's strategy, even if it seems good." And therefore, although the Lord could without sin have changed stones into bread, he willed no to, because he suggested.
The third is that he should not do anything useless to show his power, because this is vanity.

It should be noted that the devil was aiming at two things: first, to draw Christ to a desire for bodily things; secondly, to presumption. But Christ acts against both, first, by avoiding arrogance. As if to say: You say Son of God, I say of man; hence *Man shall not live by bread alone*. Likewise, the devil draws him to a desire for bodily things: *Command these stones to become loaves of bread*. Here he draws him to a desire for something spiritual: *but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God*. As if to say: Bodily life should not be loved as much as spiritual, which is preserved by spiritual food, *by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God*: "Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life" (Jn 6:69); "I will never forget your precepts; for by them you have given me life" (Ps 119:93). He says *by every word*, because all spiritual teaching is from God, whether it is spoken by man or by God. And again *from the mouth*, because the preacher is the mouth of God: "If you separate what is precious from what is worthless, you shall be as my mouth" (Jer 15:19). Or in another way: *Not in bread alone*, i.e., man does not live only by bread but also by the word, i.e., by the command of God he can be preserved without any food.

(5) *Then the devil took him to the holy city*. Having described the first temptation, the second is not presented, namely, about vain glory. The order is fitting, namely, that after the devil saw himself defeated concerning a bodily vice, he should try him on vain glory or pride: "Because pride lies in wait for good works, to destroy them" (Augustine in *The Rule*). Regarding this temptation he does three things: first, the place of the temptation is given, secondly, the attack or endeavor of the temptation (v. 6); thirdly, Christ's resistance (v. 7).

It should be noted that Luke makes this the third temptation; here it is the second. But according to Augustine it makes no difference, because everything mentioned here is also mentioned by Luke. Furthermore, neither in Luke nor here is there any indication which was first and which was second. But Rabanus says that Luke is interested in the historical order; consequently, he arranged them as they occurred. Matthew, on the other hand, followed the nature of the temptation, because after the temptations to gluttony and vain glory, the temptation to ambition follows. For that is the way Adam was tempted: first, to gluttony, "On whatsoever day you shall eat of it, you shall die the death" (Gen 2:17); secondly, to glory: "You will be as gods" (Gen 3:5; thirdly, to greed or ambition: "Knowing good and evil."

But why does he say *He took him?* For this word "taken" implies force. Jerome answers that the evangelist was describing the devil's opinion, because what Christ endured through virtue, the devil took as done by his own power. He says *holy*, either because holy actions were performed there, namely, temporal sacrifices and the like, or on account of the holiness of the fathers of those living there. Hence, from an ancient custom he calls it holy, although it had ceased to be holy: "How the faithful city has become a harlot, she that was full of justice" (Is 1:21). But it should be noted that Mk (1:13) says that "he was in the desert forty days tempted by Satan." From this it seems that all the temptations were in the desert. Therefore, it does not seem correct to say *then the devil took him...* There are two responses to this: some say that all the temptations were in the desert and that they occurred according to imaginal vision, namely, that Christ so imagined and also permitted. Others say that they occurred according to bodily vision and that the devil appeared to him in a bodily form. This seems to be implied, because he says that *he took him into the holy city*. Some say that the reason this pertains to the desert is that Jerusalem had been deserted by the Lord. But it is better to say that what is stated in Mk (1:13) should not be understood as meaning that all the temptation took place in the desert, for he does not say this, but that he was tempted by Satan. Therefore, one must admit that the first temptation was in the desert and the other two outside the desert. But the question remains: How did the devil take him up? Some say that he carried him; others (and better) that he persuaded him to go; and Christ by the discretion of his wisdom went to Jerusalem.

*And set him on the pinnacle of the temple*. It should be recalled from 1 Kings (c. 6) that Solomon made three stories in the temple with a flat roof. Next to the temple he made pinnacles by which men could ascend. Concerning this he says here: *He set him on the pinnacle of the temple*. But whether he went to the first, or second, or third, the evangelist does not say. But it is certain that he did ascend.

But did the people not see the devil carrying Christ? The answer according to those who say that he carried him is that Christ by his own power did what others could not see. Or it can be said that the devil was in the shape of a man, and it was a custom for men to ascend that way.

(6) *And said to him: "If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down*. The devil always strikes with two arrows: for with the one he entices to vain glory, with the other to suicide. And this is *if you are the Son of God*. But, certainly, to throw himself down does not suit Christ, because it befits him to ascent: "No one has ascended into heaven but he who descended from heaven, the son of man, who is in heaven" (Jn 3:13). He says *throw down*, because is intention is always to throw headlong, as he was thrown headlong: "The dragon's tail swept down a third of the stars of heaven and cast them to the earth" (Rev 12: 4). The devil also recognizes his own weakness, because those willing are overcome by him; hence he says *throw yourself down*, but he does not himself throw him: "Bow down, that we may pass over" (Is 53:23).

But why on the pinnacle? A Gloss says: because they taught in that place. Hence, it signifies that the devil tempted the great to vain glory, against which the Apostle says (1 Th 2:6): "Nor did we seek glory from men, whether from you or from others." And he says *throw yourself down*, because men who seek glory should convince others that they are showing God's sonship humble in many ways. Therefore, Cicero says in *de Officiis*: "The desire for glory must be avoided; for it snatches away freedom of the spirit, for which every effort should be made by magnanimous men.

Then he cites and authority: *For it is written*; and he uses it not to teach but to deceive. And this is taken as an argument that, as he transforms himself into an angel of light, so also his ministers, who use the authority of Sacred Scripture to deceive the simple: "The ignorant and unstable twist the scriptures to their won destruction" (2 Pt 3:16). Hence, the devil prefigured this in himself as in the head. *Because he has commanded his angels concerning you*.

Note that one twists the authority of Sacred Scripture in three ways:

first, when it refers to one thing and is explained of another; as when it refers to one just person and is explained as referring to Christ. For example, "Who has had the power to transgress and did not transgress" (Sir 31:10). Again, (Jn 14:28): "The Father is greater than I," is said of Christ as man. Hence, if it is explained of him as Son of God, the text is twisted. This is the way the devil says *angels* here, because Ps 91 (v. 11) says this of Christ's member, who needs the guardianship of angels. This is evident, because he adds, *lest you strike your foot [offend]*; for this could not be said of Christ, who cannot offend by falling into any sin.
It is twisted in a second way, when someone quotes a text in favor of something for which it is not a text, as Pr (25:21) and Rom (12:20): "If your enemy is hungry, feed him." For if anyone does something to someone in order to be punished by God, he does this against the meaning of this text. This is what the devil did, because the Scripture intends that the just man be guarded by angels in such a way that he does not fall into danger: "The Lord is a stronghold for the oppressed" (Ps 9:9). The devil, however, suggests that one should expose himself to danger, which is to tempt God.
In the third way, when one takes what is in his favor from a text and ignores what is against him; as heretics do. This is what the devil did here, because he ignored what follows: "You will tread on the lion and the adder, the young lion and the serpent you will trample under foot" (Ps 91:13). Hence, he became the exemplar of all who twist the Scriptures.

(7) *Jesus said to him...* He defends himself not by force but by wisdom: "Against wisdom, evil does not prevail" (Wis 7:30). Therefore, against that test he uses the text which explains it. As if to say: You say that I should throw myself down to see whether God will rescue me: but this is forbidden in the Scripture hence, *You shall not tempt the Lord, your God* (Dt 6:16). Or another way: You tempt and by tempting you act contrary to a text; but one who acts against a text of Scripture should not use the authority of Scripture. And the Scriptures says, *You shall not tempt...* But you are tempting the Lord, your God, who I am: "You call me Master and Lord, and you say well, for so I am" (Jn 13:13). But the first is more in accord with the letter.

Then the third temptation is presented, namely, concerning ambition or concerning reed: first, the temptation, secondly, Christ's resistance (v. 10). But the evil tempts in two ways, by deed and by word (v. 9).

In the deed two things were involved: first, he took him to a mountain; secondly, he showed him all the kingdoms of the world (v. 8b).

(8) He says *The devil took him.* The taking has been explained above. But this, namely, *to a mountain,* can be explained in two ways.

Rabanus says that this mountain was in the desert, because, according to him, all the temptations took place in the desert. But it is called very high, as compared to others in its neighborhood.
Chrysostom, however, says that he led him to one of the larger mountains of the world; and this is what the letter seems to assert, since it says *a very high mountain*. In this is signified that the devil always incites to pride, as he himself is proud: "Before your feet stumble on the twilight mountains" (Jer 13:16). Hence, he is also called a mountain.

*He showed him all the kingdoms of the world*. It should be noted that a kingdom of the world can be taken in two ways: first, spiritually; and this is the way the devil is said to reign in it: "Now is the prince of this world cast out" (Jn 12:31). Secondly, in a literal sense, so that one reigns over another: "Lo, I am calling all the tribes of the kingdoms of the north, says the Lord" (Jer 1:15). But what is said here seems to some to refer to the devil's kingdom; hence, he says *He showed him all the kingdoms of the world*, namely, over which he rules, *and the glory of them*, because when he completely rules over men, he also makes them glory: "They rejoice in doing evil and delight in the perverseness of evil" (Pr 2:14); "Why do you glory in mischief?" (Ps 52:1). Others explain it of an earthly kingdom. But then one asks, how could he show all the kingdoms of the world? Remigius says that it was done miraculously; because he showed him all the kingdoms in the twinkling of an eye, just as we read of St. Benedict that the whole world was shown to him in one glance. But it should be noted that those two do not seem good explanations, because there would have been no need to say that *he took him to a very high mountain*, because all this could have occurred in a valley. Hence Chrysostom explains it another way: *he showed him*, not that he showed each particular kingdom, but the direction in which each lay; and not only this, but *the glory of them*, i.e., he expressed to him the temporal glory of the world: "I will change their glory into shame" (Hos 4:7); "They glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things" (Phil 3:19).

(9) *And he said to him: "All these I will give you..."* In those words he does two things: he promises one thing and seeks to obtain another. In the promise is a lie, and in the seeking is pride. In the first two temptations the devil was exploring whether he was the Son of God; now, believing that he had discovered he was not, he says *All these I will give you...* where the lie is that these were not in his power: "By me princes rule and nobles govern the earth" (Pr 8:16); "That the living may know that the Most High rules the kingdom of men and gives it to whom he will" (Dan 4:17); otherwise, he would not have said *all these I will give you*; for no evil person rules without God's permission: "He makes a godless man to reign on account of the sins of the people" (Jb 34:30).

Note three things:

first, that the devil always pursues his original objective: "I will ascend into heaven above the stars of God; I will set my throne on high: I will sit on the mount of assembly in the far north; I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most High" (Is 14:14). And for that reason he induces men to idolatry, desiring to usurp what belongs to God.
Likewise, note that no one adores the devil, unless he falls as he fell: "They fell down and worshipped the golden image" (Dan 3:7). And therefore, he says *if you will fall down and worship me*.
Thirdly, note greed here. Hence, he promises a kingdom, by which is understood abundance of riches and excellence of honors. And he asks that he fall down, because the ambitious always humble themselves more than they ought. Hence Ambrose: "Ambition has its own danger: it bends down in deference in order to be paid honor; and while it wishes to be exalted, it is hurled down."

The curbing of the enemy is described. In regard to this he does two things: first, he checks the temptation; secondly, he cites a text (v. 10b).

(10) He says, therefore, *Then Jesus said to him*.

Note that Christ had heard many insults, but did not care. But this, *if you will fall down and adore me*, he did not endure, because the others were insults against himself, but this one was an insult against God. Hence Chrysostom: "A personal insult should be endured, but to take no notice of an insult against God is exceedingly irreverent." Therefore, he says *Be gone, Satan!* (2 Sam 19:10): "With zeal I have been zealous for the Lord God of hosts"; "Zeal for your house has consumed me" (Ps 69:9). Note also that it is not in the devil's power to tempt as much as he wills, but as much as God permits; hence, he says *Be gone!* As if to say: I do not wish you to tempt me any more: "God is faithful and will not lest you be tempted beyond your strength, but with the temptation will also provide the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it" (2 Cor 10:13); "Thus far shall you come and no farther, and here shall your proud waves be stayed" (Jb 38:11). And it should be noted that the Lord used almost similar words to Peter (Mt 16:23). But there he said: "Get behind me." Hence the thought here and there is not the same, because Satan is taken to mean adversary. Therefore, the Lord wished that Peter, who wanted to obstruct his passion, go behind him; but here he says, *Be gone* only, because the devil cannot follow him. Therefore, he says *Be gone*, namely, to hell: "Depart, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels" (Mt 25:4). *It is written*: (Dt 6:16). He adduces these texts from Dt to signify that the doctrine of the New Testament is signified by Deuteronomy.

What follows, namely, *The Lord your God*, can be taken in two ways. As if to say: You, O devil, say that I should fall down and adore you; but the Law says, *The Lord your God shall you worship*. It can, therefore, be cited to show that a mere man should not be adored. Or it can be taken that he is speaking of himself as God: *The Lord your God shall you adore*. As if to say: You should rather adore me than I you, because it is written... Yet the first is more in accord with the letter. And note that he says two things: *you shall adore and you shall serve*, and there is a difference between them. For a man should relate himself to God in two ways: he should be subject to him and should elevate himself toward him as the ultimate end. In regard to the first we owe him total obedience: "We must obey God rather than men" (Acts 5:29). For we are subject to him, when we do his entire will. We are elevated to God in two ways: sometimes we draw ourselves to him: "Go to him and be radiant; so your faces will never be ashamed" (Ps 34:5); sometimes we draw others to him: "We are fellow workers for God:" (1 Cor 3:9). We show both of these in a sense-perceptible way: because, when we bow, we tell ourselves that we should be subject to God; therefore he says *the Lord your God*: "May all nations serve him" (Ps 72:11). Also by offering sacrifice and praises we signify that we should raise our minds to him; and to this pertains service. Therefore, *and him only shall you serve*.

Service is twofold: one is reserved for God alone; and this is called *latria*, which is twofold. For there is an adoration owed only to God, such that he is served before all else; the other service consists in tending toward him as the ultimate end, for there is an adoration or service which is rendered only by subjects, as when inferiors serve superiors: "Let every person be subject to the governing authorities" (Rom 13:1). But they should not be obeyed above all things, because never contrary to God. Similarly, there is no creature that should be regarded as the ultimate end: "Put not your trust in princes, in a son of man, in whom there is no help" (Ps 146:3); "Cursed is the man who trusts in man" (Jer 17:5). There is another service, which is owed to prelates; in Greek it is called *dulia*.

(11) Then Christ's victory is presented, and it is suggested in two ways: in the devil's departure: *The devil left him*: "Resist the devil and he will flee from you" (Jas 4:7). And as the custom was in olden days, when men won a victory, they were honored; so here Christ's triumph is celebrated by angels. Hence, *and behold angels came and ministered to him*. He does not say "they descended," because they were always with him, even though they had departed for a little while according to his wish, so that the devil might have room for tempting. For they ministered in external matters, namely, in miracles and other bodily things done through the medium of angels; but in internal matters he did not need them. In this is signified that men who overcome the devil deserve the ministry of angels: "It came to pas that the beggar died, and he was carried into Abraham's bosom" (Lk 16:22). And it should be noted that the devil left Christ for a time, because later he used the Jews as his members to oppose him...


## 4—2

Mt 4:12-22


> 12. And when Jesus had heard that John was delivered up, he retired into Galilee: 13. And leaving the city Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capharnaum on the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and of Nephthalim; 14. That it might be fulfilled which was said by Isaias the prophet: 15. Land of Zabulon and land of Nephthalim, the way of the sea beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles: 16. The people that sat in darkness, hath seen great light: and to them that sat in the region of the shadow of death, light is sprung up. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say: Do penance, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. 18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea (for they were fishers). 19. And he saith to them: Come ye after me, and I will make you to be fishers of men. 20. And they immediately leaving their nets, followed him. 21. And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets: and he called them. 22. And they forthwith left their nets and father, and followed him.

After showing how Christ was tested and approved, namely, by overcoming the devil, the evangelist now shows how Christ began to teach. Regarding this he does three things: first, he describes the place where he preached; secondly, how he chose the ministers of his preaching (v. 18); thirdly, how he led the crowd to listen (v. 23).

In regard to the first he describes the time, place (v. 12b) and method of preaching (v. 17).

(12) The time of Christ's public preaching was after John's imprisonment; hence, he says, *Now when Jesus heard that John had been handed over*, namely, by God, because he permitted it.

To understand the gospels, it should be noted that there seems to be a difference here between John and the other three; because they say that Christ descended into Capernaum after John's arrest, but John says that he descended there before that. Yet it was in Galilee. The answer is that John, who wrote last, supplied what had been omitted by the others. But why did they omit? The answer is that although Christ had done certain things in the first two years, they were few compared to the third year. Therefore, it is necessary to say that John speaks about things he did in the first and second, and some things done in the third year; but the others about things done in the third year.

There is also a question about the number of years Christ preached. Some say two and one-half years; so that the half is counted from Epiphany to Passover, although it is not a complete half, for John mentions only three Passovers, because he says that after the baptism he went to Jerusalem (Jn 2:13). After that he mentions the Passover, when the miracle of the five loaves occurred; after that it was one year to the passion. But this does not seem to agree with the opinion of the Church; for the Church holds that three miracles were performed on Epiphany, namely, the adoration of the Magi, the baptism and the changing of water into wine. It is necessary, therefore, to say that from the baptism to the changing of water into wine was one year. Hence, it seems that Christ preached for three years, because until the changing of water into wine was one year; from then to the Passover was the second year; from the purification to the passion was another. For this is the way the Church reckons it. Accordingly, one must admit that John says little about the first year, something about the second, namely, how he went down to Capernaum, and about the question which arose between Christ and the Jews about purification. It should also be noted that John was killed near Passover time, because it says in Jn (6:4) that when the miracle of the five loaves was performed, the Passover was at hand; and in Mt (14:13) it says that when Christ heard of John's death, he withdrew into Galilee. Therefore, it is clear that John was beheaded near the Passover, and that Christ did not preach publicly except for one year.

(13) Then he treats of the place: first, the place of the province; secondly, of the city (v. 12b). He says, therefore, *He withdrew*. This withdrawal is not the first one about which John speaks; but this was after one or two years, because the evangelists are silent about this. He withdrew for two reasons: first to put off the time of the passion: "My time has not yet come" (Jn 7:6); secondly, as an example to us, namely, that we should flee persecutions: "If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you" (Jn 15:20). but mystically it declares that Christ's preaching was destined to pass to the Gentiles, because the Jews persecuted God's grace: "It was necessary that the word of God be spoken first to you. Since you cast it from you and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles" (Acts 13:46). Arriving in Galilee, he came first to Nazareth, as Luke (4:16 ff) says. There he entered the synagogue and taught: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me." As a result of his preaching they led him to the brow of the hill, that they might throw him down headlong. After this, Christ fled and came to Capernaum, where he immediately cured the demoniac (Mk 1:23). But Matthew omits this. Now Nazareth means flower. By this is understood the doctors of the law who do not come to maturity. For Capernaum means most beautiful villa and signifies the Church: "You are beautiful, my love" (Song of Songs 6:4). Capernaum is really a sea-coast town, because it lies near a fresh-water lake. For the Jews called every body of water a sea, because the Church has been placed near the tribulations of the world. *In the territory of Zebulon and Naphtali*. For Galilee was so divided that one part was in the tribe of Zebulon and Naphtali. From it were selected the princes of the Church, namely, the apostles.

(14) *That what was spoken by Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled*. Note that not the exact words but only the sense of Isaiah (9:11) are given here. Isaiah says: "In the former time he brought into contempt the land of Zebulon and the land of Naphtali, but in the latter time he will make glorious the way to the sea, the land beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations. The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light." This is explained in three ways according to Jerome:

first, in the following way. The former time was reduced by the preaching of Christ from sins; and in the latter the way, which is near the Sea of Galilee, was burdened by the weight of sins, because after the preaching of Christ they persecuted the apostles.
Or another way: the former time. It touches history, because the king of the Assyrians, Tiglath-Pileser, who was the first to invade the land of the Jews, first led those tribes captive. And this is the former time that was shortened, because then the sinners were first led into captivity. And the latter time..., because later all the people were led into captivity. But why mention all this? Because the Lord willed to give consolation first where the persecution first began.
Or another way, the first time, i.e., during the time Christ preached, the burden of sin was lightened by the preaching of Christ; in the latter time it was increased, i.e., the preaching of Christ was condensed and multiplied by the preaching of Paul, who preached there.

(15) For the evangelist gives only the sense in the text: *The land of Zebulon and the land of Naphtali, toward the sea across the Jordan*, i.e., near the sea. He says *land*, i.e., people, because Galilee is divided into two parts: one of Gentiles, the other of Jews. And then it had been divided in keeping with 1 Kings (11:11), because Solomon gave the king of Tyre twenty towns for the wood he sent him for the construction of the temple. Since he was a Gentile, he sent Gentiles there to inhabit it. That is why it is called *the Galilee of the Gentiles*; and it was in the tribe of Naphtali, although others were in the tribe of Judah.

(16) *The people who sat [walked] in darkness have seen a great light*. He says two things *who walk* and *who sat*; for one in the darkness, which is not very dense, and who is not dazed by it, walks, especially when he hopes to find light; but when he is dazed by the darkness, he stands. That is the difference between Jews and Gentiles; because although the Jews were in darkness, they were not entirely overcome by it, because not all of them worshiped idols but hoped that Christ would come. Therefore, they walked: "Who walks in darkness and has no light? Let him hope in the Lord and rely upon his God" (Is 50:10). But the Gentiles were not waiting for anyone; and therefore, there was no hope for light. Again, they were overcome by the darkness, because they worshiped idols; for in Ps 76 (v. 1) it says: "In Judah God is known." Therefore, they were standing. And this is what is stated: *The people who sat in darkness have seen a great light*. The light of the Jews was not great: "We have the prophetic word made more sure. You will do well to pay attention to this as to a lamp shining in a dark place" (2 Pt 1:19); but that was as great as the light of the sun: "But for you who fear my name the sun of righteousness shall shine" (Mal 4:2). *And for those who sat*, i.e., the Gentiles, *in the region and shadow of death*. Death is damnation in hell: "Death will be their shepherd" (Ps 49:14). The shadow of death is the likeness of future damnation, which is in sinners. But the major punishment of those in hell is separation from God. And because sinners are already separated from God, they have the likeness of future damnation, just as the just have likenesses of future happiness: "And we all, beholding the glory of the Lord, are being changed into his likeness from one degree of glory into another" (2 Cor 3:18). And note that light has dawned for the Gentiles, because they did not go to the light, but the light came to them: "The light came into the world" (Jn 3:19). And that land is in the confines of Jews and Gentiles to show that he called both: "It is too light a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob and to restore the preserved of Israel" (Is 49:6); and later: "I will give you as a light to the nations, that my salvation may reach to the end of the earth" (49:6).

(17) *From that time Jesus began to preach*. Having mentioned the place where Christ first began to preach, the method of preaching is now described. *From that time*, i.e., after the victory over gluttony, vain glory and ambition or greed, *he began to preach*, for such can fittingly preach. And thus is fulfilled Acts (1:1): "Jesus began to do and to teach." Or *From that time*, i.e., after John's arrest, he began to preach publicly, for previously it was in secret and to certain ones (Jn 1:38), namely, to Peter, Andrew, Philip and Nathanael, but here publicly. He did not wish to preach publicly at first, so that John would have opportunity to preach; otherwise, he would have preached to no avail, as the light of the stars is obscured by the light of the sun. By this is signified that with the end of the figures of the Law, the preaching of Christ begins: "When the perfect comes, the imperfect will pass away" (1 Cor 13:10). By John is signified the Law: "for al the prophets and the law prophesied until John" (Mt 11:13). *Do penance*. Note that Christ says the same words here as John and for two reasons: first, he admonishes us about humility, namely, that no one should disdain to preach what has been said by others, since the very font of ecclesiastical knowledge preached the same. Secondly, because John is the voice, but heist the word. But the same is signified by the word and the voice, except that the word is a vehicle of the voice. In regard to this he does two things: one admonishes, *Repent*; the other promises, *the kingdom of heaven is at hand*.

But why did he not admonish to justice in the beginning of his preaching but to penance? The reason was that he admonished about justice before by the law of nature and of the Scripture, but they had been violated: "They have transgressed the laws, violated the statutes, broken the everlasting covenant" (Is 24:5). For by this he gives us to understand that he found all sinners: "Christ Jesus came into this world to save sinners" (1 Tim 1:15); "For all have sinned and need the glory of God" (Rom 3:23). And this is *Repent*. But he promises something else: hence, *the kingdom of heaven is at hand*. This promise differs in two ways from the promise of the Old Testament, because there the promises were temporal things, but here heavenly and eternal: "If you listen, you shall eat the good things of the land" (Is 1:19). Likewise, it was the kingdom of the Chananeans and Jebusites; here the kingdom of heaven. Hence, *the kingdom of heaven is at hand*.

Therefore, the doctrine of Christ is called the New Testament, because in it a new pact between us and God was struck concerning the kingdom of heaven: "I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah" (Jer 31:31). Secondly, because the old law contained a threat along with the promise: "If you are willing and obedient, you will eat the good things of the land. But if you refuse and rebel, you shall be devoured by the sword" (Is 1:19). Dt (c. 28) says the same thing: there are many blessings promised those who observe the Law, and Moses threatened many curses on its transgressors. The reason is that the old law was a law of fear, but the new of love. Augustine: "A slight difference, fear and love"; "You have not come to what may be touched, a blazing fire, and darkness, and gloom, and a tempest, and the should of a trumpet, and a voice whose words made the hearers entreat that no further messages be spoken to them" (Heb 12:18). Therefore, he says *the kingdom of heaven is at hand*, namely, eternal happiness. And he says *at hand*, because the one who gave it came down to us, since we were unable to go up to God.

(18) *As he walked*. After he began to preach, he wanted ministers of his preaching. Hence, he calls them to himself. In regard to this he does two things in that he calls two pairs of ministers: first, Peter and Andrew; secondly, James and John.

In regard to the first, four things are done: first, the place of the calling is mentioned; secondly, the occupation of those called (v. 18b); thirdly, the call (v. 19); fourthly, their perfect obedience (v. 20).

He says, therefore, *As he walked by the Sea of Galilee*: a fitting place, because, as a Gloss says, since he was about to call fishermen, he walked near the sea. As far as the mystery is concerned, it should be noted that for God to stand signifies God's eternity and unchangeableness; to walk signifies his birth in time. Therefore, by the fact that when walking he called his disciples is signified that he drew us to himself by the mystery of the Incarnation: "Awake, O my God, you have appointed a judgment" (Ps 7:6), i.e., arranged for it to be fulfilled, "and the assembly of the people will gather about you." He says, *of Galilee*, by which is understood the turbulence of this world: "The heart of the wicked is as the tossing sea; for it cannot rest, and its waters turn up mire and dirt" (Is 57:20). Christ assumed a likeness to sinners: "God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh" (Rom 8:3).

Then those called are described: first, their number; secondly, their names; thirdly, what they were doing; fourthly, as to their livelihood.

He says, therefore, *He saw two*, not only with the bodily eye, but also with that of the mind; for his vision is a regard of mercy. Hence, Ex (3:7): "I have seen the affliction of my people, who are in Egypt." And note that the same thing is signified by *two* and *brothers*,for both pertain to charity, which consists in the love of God and neighbor. Therefore, he chose by two's, and by two's he sent them to preach. By this he wished spiritual charity to be signified, because charity is made more firm, when it is founded on nature: "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity" (Ps 133:1).
*Simon, who is called Peter*, i.e., now, but not then; because Christ gave him this name later, but first he promised: "You shall be called Cephas (Jn 1:42). Then he gave it: "You are Peter" (Mt 16:18). *And Andrew*. Every preacher should have those names. For Simon means obedient; Peter, comprehending; Andrew, courage. For a preacher should be obedient, that he might invite others to it: "The obedient man shall speak of victories" (Pr 21:28); comprehending, that he may know how to instruct others: "I had rather speak five words with my mind, in order to instruct others" (1 Cor 14:19); courageous, in order not to be terrified by threats: "I make you this day a fortified city, an iron pillar, and a bronze wall" (Jer 1:18); "I have made your face hard against their faces, and your forehead hard against their foreheads. Like adamant harder than flint I have made your face" (Ez 3:8).
He continues: *casting a net into the sea*. Chrysostom: Why did God choose that hour? He answers: to give an example that we should never neglect the service of God for our occupations. Or, because by this act the action of future preachers was prefigured, for men are drawn by the words of the preacher as though by nets.
There occupation is described: *for they were fishermen*. It should be noted that fishermen are simpler than other men; and the Lord wanted to have and to pick men of the simplest condition, so that what they accomplished would not be attributed to human wisdom: "Consider your calling, brethren; not many of you were wise according to worldly standards, not many were powerful, not many were of noble birth. But God chose what is foolish in the world to shame the wise" (1 Cor 1:26). Therefore, he did not choose Augustine or the orator Cyprian, but Peter, the fisherman; and by the fisherman he gained both an emperor and an orator.

(19) *And he said to them*. Here is described their call, concerning which three things must be considered: first, he invites them; secondly, he promises them a new position; thirdly, a reward.

He says, therefore: *Come*. This is entirely from God's generosity that he draws them to himself: "Come to me, you who desire me, and eat your full of my produce" (Si 24:19); "Come to me, all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest" (Mt 11:28). *After me*. As if to say: I go, and you come *after me*, because I will be your leader: "I will teach you the way of wisdom; I will lead you into the paths of righteousness. When you walk, your step will not be hampered; and if you run, you will not stumble" (Pr 4:11).
*I will make*, i.e., I will change your occupation into something higher: "I am sending for many fishers, says the Lord, and they shall catch them" (Jer 16:16). He says, *I will make*, because the preacher labors in vain outwardly, unless the grace of the Redeemer is present inwardly; for it is not by his power that he draws men but by the action of Christ.
Therefore, he says *I will make*. this, indeed, is the greatest dignity; hence, Denis: "Nothing is more dignified among men's occupations than to be made a cooperator with God." For the dignity consists in its splendor. But those so enlightened as to enlighten others draw more closely to that dignity. But although men who follow Christ enlighten and do great things regarding righteousness, yet they assert the dignity of Christ in regard to one thing only; but the life of preachers in regard to two things: "Those who turn many to righteousness shall shine like the stars forever and ever" (Dan 12:3).

(20) Their obedience is indicated, when he says *immediately they left their nets and followed him*. He indicates their obedience in regard to three things:

first, as to promptness: "Do not postpone from day to day" (Sir 5:7); "But when he who had set me apart before I was born, and had called me through his grace..., I did not confer with flesh and blood" (Gal 1:15); "The Lord God has opened my ear, and I was not rebellious, I turned not backward" (Is 50:5).
Secondly, as to disencumbering themselves, because they left behind; here one must not consider the amount, but the affection. For one who leaves everything he could have, leaves all things. But what was the need for leaving all things? Chrysostom: "No one can possess riches and come to the kingdom of heaven completely; for they are an obstacle to virtue, because they lessen anxiety for eternal things, i as much as man cannot cling to riches in a perfect way." "Therefore, they should be abandoned: "Every athlete exercises self-control in all things" (1 Cor 9:25).
Thirdly, in regard to execution, because they followed him. For it is no great thing to leave all things, but perfection consists in following, which is through charity: "If I give away all I have, and if I deliver my body to be burned, but have not love, I gain nothing" (1 Cor 13:3). For perfection *per se* does not consist in external things, namely, poverty, chastity and the like, except in the sense that they are instruments to charity. Therefore, he says *followed him*.

(21) Then he deals with another call: *And going on from there he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother*. First, those called are described; secondly, their call (v. 21b); thirdly, their obedience (v. 22).

The ones called are described in four ways: the number, name, piety and poverty.

He says, therefore, *and going on from there he saw two other brothers*. Note that in the beginning he called brothers; and although he called many others, special mention is made of them, because they were important and because he called them by two's. For the New Law is based on charity; hence, even in the Old Law he called two brothers, Aaron and Moses, because even there the command about charity was given.
And because the New is more perfect, he called two more brothers: *James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother*.
By the four brother is designated the four gospels or four virtues: by Peter, which means comprehending, the virtue of prudence; by Andrew, which means very courageous, the virtue of courage; by James, which means supplanter, the virtue of justice, by John on account of his virginity, the virtue of temperance.
Piety is mentioned, because they were with their father, Zebedee. Chrysostom: Their piety must be admired, because they were poor and obtained their living by the art of fishing, and yet they did not leave their aged father: "Whoever fears the Lord, honors his parents" (Sir 3:7).
Poverty is designated by the fact that they were mending their nets. But by those who cast the nets are signified people who transact business in the world at an early age; by those who have already cast them are signified those who have been transacting business for a long time in the world: "It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth" (Lam 3:27).

*And he called them* inwardly and outwardly: "Those whom he predestined, he also called" (Rom 8:30). To call inwardly is no more than to offer help to the human mind, when he wills to convert us.
(22) He follows with obedience: *They left the boat and their father, and followed him*. Note that the other two only left their boat, but these left nets, boat and father. This signifies that for the sake of Christ we should give up all worldly occupation, which are designated by the net: "No soldier on service gets entangled in worldly pursuits" (2 Tim 2:4); riches or possessions, which are designated by the boat: "If you would be perfect, go and sell all you have, and give to the poor, and you shall have treasure in heaven, and come, follow me" (Mt 19:21); carnal affection, which is designated by the father: "Forget your people and your father's house" (Ps 45:10). But mystically the world is signified by Zebedee, which means turbulent flow.

But there is a question here: for it seems that they sinned by leaving their poor and aged father, because children are supposed to support parents. And, in general, one might ask whether it is lawful for anyone to neglect parents in extreme necessity by entering the religious life. The answer is that a counsel never conflicts with a precept; but "honor your father and mother is a precept. Therefore, if a father can in no way live without help from his son, the son should net enter the religious life. But this was not the case with Zebedee, because he was able to help himself and had what was necessary.

There is also a textual question. For Matthew seems to be contrary to John and Luke here; because John (1:28) says that they were called near the Jordan, but Matthew says it was near the Sea of Galilee. Again, Luke (5:10) says that he called Peter and Andrew, James and John at the same time, although the other two are not mentioned, because it is believed that they were there. Also it says there that he called them all together, but here separately. The answer is that there was a threefold calling of the apostles: first, they were called to intimacy with Christ, and that is mentioned in John (c. 1); and this was in the first years of Christ's preaching. This does not conflict with John's later statement (2:2) that he went with his disciples to Cana of Galilee, because, according to Augustine, they were not disciples then, but would be. It is like saying that Paul the apostle was born in Tarsus of Cilicia, since he was not an apostle then. Or one might say that he is speaking of other disciples, who were all called, believing in Christ. Secondly, the were called to discipleship: it is of this that Luke speaks in c. 5. The third call was that they adhere to Christ completely. It is of this that Matthew speaks here. This is clear, because, according to Augustine, it is stated in Luke (5:11): "When they had brought their boats to land." Therefore, they had a boat and took care of it, as though they would return to it; but there he says, "leaving all things they followed him." Therefore, he is speaking here of the final following.


## 4—3

Mt 4:23-25


> 23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom: and healing all manner of sickness and every infirmity, among the people. 24. And his fame went throughout all Syria, and they presented to him all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and such as were possessed by devils, and lunatics, and those that had the palsy, and he cured them: 25. And much people followed him from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.

It is customary among kings that, when the army is gathered, they go to war. In the same way Christ, after gathering an army of apostles, goes forth to fight against the devil with the weapons of preaching, in order to expel him from the world. Hence, here the doctrine and preaching of Christ are treated: first, the preaching is mentioned; secondly, its effect (v. 24).

In regard to the first, three things are touched: first, the solicitude of the teacher; secondly, the manner of teaching; thirdly, confirmation of the doctrine proposed.

(23) The solicitude is shown in two ways,

because he did not seek his own ease; hence, *He went about*: "Never flag in zeal" (Rom 12:11).
Secondly, because he was not an acceptor of persons, of lands or of villas; rather *he went about all Galilee* without distinction: "Let us go on to the next towns, that I may preach there also" (Mk 1:38); "In all places of his dominion" (Ps 103:22).

The manner is shown at *teaching in their synagogues*. He says two things, *teaching and preaching*: teaching what must be in the present, preaching about future things. Or teaching what pertains to the formation of morals: "I am the Lord, who teaches you useful things" (Is 48:17); "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him who beings good tidings, who publishes salvation" (Is 52:7). Or teaching natural justices: for some things, which natural reason dictates, are treated in theology, namely, justice and the like. In regard to this he says, *teaching*. Other matters, which transcend reason, such as the Trinity and so on. In regard to these he says, *preaching*.

But against this is a statement found in a Gloss which teaches natural justices, such as chastity, humility and the like; for natural virtues do not seem able to be called virtues, because virtues exist through grace. The answer is that the inclination and beginning is natural; but the perfection, by which a man is made pleasing, is from grace, discipline and from habit.

*In their synagogues*. Note two things:

first, that he sought the multitude, in order that the preaching might make more progress: "Then I will thank you in the great congregation" (Ps 35:18).
Also that he preached only to the Jews: "It was necessary that the word of God should be spoken first to you" (Acts 13:46). *Preaching the gospel of the kingdom*: not fables and curiosities, but matters pertaining to the kingdom of God and beneficial to men.

Then the preaching is confirmed by miracles: "They went forth and preached everywhere, while the Lord worked with them and confirmed the message by the signs that attended it" (Mk 16:20). Hence, *healing*. Disease can refer to bodily sickness; infirmity to infirmity of the soul, for the infirmities of the soul are not less than those of the body. Or by diseases are meant serious and prolonged infirmities; by infirmities, any other: "Who heals all your infirmities" (Ps 103:3); "A long illness baffles the physician" (Sir 10:10). We are also given to understand by that, that preachers should confirm their teaching with works; if not by miracles, then by a virtuous life: "I will not venture to speak of anything except what Christ has wrought through me to win obedience from the gentiles, by word and by deed, by the power of signs and wonders, by the power of the Holy Spirit" (Rom 15:18).

(24) *So his fame spread throughout all Syria*. Here is mentioned the effect of the preaching and it is threefold, namely, the fame of his example, the trust men had in him, and the devotion with which men followed him.

He says, therefore, *His fame spread throughout Syria*. Syria is the territory from Capernaum to the great sea; hence, it also was spread even into the land of the Gentiles. This, too, applies to preachers, namely, that they have a good reputation: "Have regard for a good name" (Sir 41:12); "Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a workman who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth" (2 Tim 2:15). By Syria can also be understood the pride of the world, because that is its meaning; and Christ's fame was spread throughout the whole world.
Trust is indicated at *they brought him all the sick*, for they knew that he could heal: "Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed" (Jer 17:14). First, he says *His fame spread*, and then *they brought him all the sick*, because when anyone has a reputation for holiness, men more readily disclose to him a wound of conscience. *Those afflicted with various diseases and pains*. By these serious infirmities are designated spiritual infirmities. By diseases can be understood lingering sicknesses. And because some are burdened with infirmity and others with sharp pains, this is signified, when he says *those afflicted with pains*. And they signify persons with a disturbed and burdened conscience: "The pains of death encompassed me, the cords of Sheol assailed me" (Ps 18:4).

*Demoniacs*: and this is what it says in Luke (6:1): "Those troubled with unclean spirits were cured" (Lk 6:18). By this are understood those who worship idols: "All the gods of the Gentiles are idols" (Ps 96:5); "I do not want you to be partners with demons" (1 Cor 10:20). *Epileptics [lunatics]*. Properly speaking, they are people who suffer the infirmity of madness, when the moon wanes; and then they are seized by demons. The devil afflicts them more at that time for two reasons. Jerome assigns one, namely, to disgrace God's creature: and this is even done in the effects of magic, in which the demons are invoked under certain constellations and they respond by praising the creature and inducing him to idolatry. The second reason is better, because the devil cannot do anything except by bodily powers. But there is no doubt that lower bodies are changed according to diverse changes of higher bodies; and therefore, the devil when invoked comes gladly, when he sees higher bodies acting toward that effect for which he is invoked. But while the moon is waning, moisture fails; and therefore, the waning of the moon makes for such infirmity, when the earth has no abundance of moisture. Consequently, the devil harasses more at that time; and this is *and lunatics*. By these we can understand inconstant persons: ["A holy man abides in wisdom as the sun; for the fool changes as the moon" (Sir 27:11)], who intend to live chastely but are overcome by passions: "For I do not do what I want, but I do the very things I hate" (Rom 7:15). *And paralytics*. Properly speaking, these are persons with enfeebled members, such that they cannot have the use of their members. They signify the ignorant. All these were cured by Christ: *and he cured them*, i.e., perfectly.
(25) Then is mentioned the third effect, namely, the devotion of the followers; hence, he says *Great crowds followed him*. "Awake, O my God; you have appointed a judgment. Let the assembly of peoples be gathered about you" (Ps 7:6). But it should be noted that people follow him in different ways: because some with an interest in health, i.e., spiritual; hence, "having left all things, they followed him" (Mt 4:22); "Lo, we have left all things and followed you" (Mt 19:27). Others follow with an interest in bodily health: "A great multitude of people from all Judea and Jerusalem and the seacoast of Tyre and Sidon came to hear him and be healed of their diseases" (Lk 6:17). Some followed only out of curiosity to see miracles: "And many followed him, because they saw the signs he did on those who were diseased" (Jn 6:2). Some followed to entrap, as the Pharisees and Scribes: "I hear many whispering. Terror is on every side" (Jer 20:10). *From Galilee*, which is the province in which Christ chiefly preached and it means transmigration. By this is signified those who should transmigrate from vices to virtues. *And the Decapolis*. This region is where there are ten villages, and they signify those who are eager to observe the ten commandments. *And Jerusalem*, which means vision of peace and signifies those who come to Christ with a desire for peace: "Great peace have those who love your law" (Ps 119:165). *And Judea*, which means confession and signifies those who come to Christ by the remission of sins: "Judea became his sanctuary" (Ps 114:2). *And from beyond the Jordan*. This signifies those who come to Christ by baptism, of which the Jordan was the figure.
