# Chapter 5

**5—1

Mt 5:1-2**

> 1. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain, and when he was set down, his disciples came unto him. 2. And opening his mouth he taught them, saying:

*Seeing the crowds*. Here the Lord proposes his doctrine, and it is divided into three parts. In the first the doctrine of Christ is presented; in the second the power of the doctrine (c. 13); in the third the end to which it leads (c. 17).

The first is divided into three parts: in the second the ministers of the doctrine are formed (c. 10); in the third the opponents are confounded (c. 11).

The first is divided into two parts: in the first the doctrine of Christ is propounded; in the second it is confirmed by miracles (c. 8).

The first is divided into two: in the first is given, as it were, a title to the doctrine; in the second the doctrine is explained (v. 3).

In regard to the first he does three things: first, he describes the place where the doctrine was proposed; secondly, the audience (v. 1b); thirdly, the method of teaching (v. 2).

(1a) He says, therefore: I have said that the crowds followed him. *Seeing the crowds, Jesus went up on the mountain*. This text can be understood in two ways:

First, in the way: *He went up* to teach the crowds and not to flee. Hence Chrysostom says that as an artisan, seeing the material ready, likes to work, so the priest likes to preach, when he sees the congregation assembled; and therefore, *he went up*: "I will thank you in the great congregation" (Ps 35:18).
Or in this way: *he went up*, fleeing the crowds, so that he might more securely teach the disciples: "The words of the wise are heard in silence" (Sir 21:17).

It should be noted that Christ is said to have had three refuges: for sometimes he fled to the mountain, as it says here and in John (8:7): "Jesus went to the Mount of Olives"; sometimes to a ship: "Getting into one of the boats" (Lk 5:3); thirdly, into the desert: "Come away by yourselves to a lonely place" (Mk 6:31). These are quite suitable, for man can find refuge in God in three ways:

in the protection afforded by God's loftiness, which is signified by the mountain: "Those who trust in the Lord are like Mount Zion" (Ps 125:1).
In the society of the Church, which is designated by the ship: "Jerusalem, built as a city, which is bound firmly together" (Ps 122:3).
In the solitude of religion, which is signified by the desert, through contempt for temporal things: "I will bring her into the desert, and speak tenderly to her" (Hos 2:14); "I would wander afar, I would dwell in solitude" (Ps 55:7).

He went up on the mountain for five reasons:

First, to show his greatness, for he is the mountain about which Ps 68 (v. 15) "O mighty mountain, mountain of Bashan."
Secondly, to show that the teacher of this doctrine ought to rise to eminence of life: "Get you up to a high mountain, you who instruct Zion" (Is 40:9).
The third reason was to show the dignity of the Church, to which the doctrine is proposed: "The mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established as the highest of the mountains" (Is 2:2).
Fourthly, to show the perfection of this doctrine, because it is most perfect: "Your righteousness is like the mountains of God" (Ps 37:6).
Fifthly, that it might agree with the old legislation, which was given on a mountain (Ex c. 19 and c. 24).

(1b) Then the hearers are mentioned: *When he sat down, his disciples came to him*. Two things can be noted in his sitting: humiliation: "You know when I sit down" (Ps 139:2). When he was in the loftiness of divine majesty, his doctrine could not be grasped; but men began to grasp it when he humbled himself. Or this pertains to the dignity of his office of teacher: "The Scribes and Pharisees sit on Moses' seat" (Mt 23:2). For leisure is required for the study of wisdom. *His disciples came to him*, not only in body but in mind: "Look to him and be enlightened" (Ps 34:5); "So they followed in your steps, receiving direction from you" (Dt 33:3). And note that when the Lord preached to the multitude, he stood: "He came down with them and stood in a level place" (Lk 6:17); but here, when he taught the disciples, he sat. From this arose the custom that one preaches to the crowds standing, but sitting to religious.

(2) *He opened his mouth and taught them*. By saying, *he opened*, is signified that for a long time previously he had been silent. And it shows that he was about to make a great and long sermon, as Augustine says. Or that he was about to utter great and profound things; for men were wont to do that: "After this, Job opened his mouth and cursed the day of his birth" (Jb 3:1). He says, *his*, for previously he had opened the mouth of the prophets: "Wisdom opened the mouth of the dumb and made the tongues of babes speak clearly" (Wis 10:21); for he is the wisdom of the Father

But here a question arises: for many statements of this sermon are also presented in Luke (6:20ff). But there seems to be contrariety between the one and the other, as is clear from the text. Augustine presents two solutions to this: one is that this sermon is distinct from that; for he first went up the mountain to give this sermon to disciples and later came down to find a crowd assembled, to whom he gave the same sermon in summary form. The latter is what Luke recorded. Or it might be that there was one mountain, which had a plateau on the side and this plateau was atop a small mountain. Hence, the Lord went up the mountain, i.e., the plateau of that mountain. First, he went up higher and assembled the disciples. Then he chose 12 apostles. Later, he descended and found a crowd assembled. When the disciples joined them, he sat down and gave that sermon to the crowd and to the disciples. And this seems to be correct, because Matthew says at the end of the sermon (7:28) that the crowds were astonished at his teaching. Yet, whichever way it is taken, there is no contrariety.


## 5—2

Mt 5:3-12


> 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 4. Blessed are the meek: for they shall possess the land. 5. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. 6. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice: for they shall have their fill. 7. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. 8. Blessed are the clean of heart: they shall see God. 9. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. 10. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 11. Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak all that is evil against you, untruly, for my sake: 12. Be glad and rejoice for your reward is very great in heaven. For so they persecuted the prophets that were before you.

After giving a brief title to the doctrine of Christ, the evangelist now presents the doctrine itself and its effect, namely, the crowd's astonishment. But it should be remarked that, according to Augustine, the whole perfection of our life is contained in that sermon of the Lord. He proves this by the fact that it mentions the end to which it leads, namely, a promise. But what man chiefly desires is happiness. Hence, the Lord does three things here: first, he mentions the reward attained by those who accept this doctrine; secondly, he lays down precepts (v. 17); thirdly, he teaches how one can arrive at observing them (v. 20).

In regard to the first he does two things, because some are only observers of this doctrine, and others ministers: first, therefore, he describes the happiness of those who observe it; secondly, of its ministers (v. 11).

It should be noted that many things are presented here about the beatitudes; but no one could have spoken so exactly in the Lord's words, that he would attain the Lord's purpose. Yet it should be known that all complete happiness is included in those words: for all men seek happiness, but they differ in judging about happiness; and therefore, some seek this and some that. But we find four opinions about happiness (or beatitude):

Some believe that it consists only in external things, i.e., in an affluence of temporal things: "Happy the people to whom such blessings fall" (Ps 144:15);
others, that it consists in man's satisfying his own will; hence, we say: "Happy the man who lives as he wishes." (Ec 3:12): "I know there is nothing better for them than to be happy."
The third say that happiness consists in the virtues of the active life;
others say in the virtues of the contemplative life, namely, of divine and intelligible things, as Aristotle.

All those opinions are false, although not in the same way. Hence, the Lord rejects all of them.

He rejects the opinion of those who said that it consists in an abundance of external goods; hence he says, *Blessed are the poor in spirit*, i.e., the affluent are not blessed.
He rejects the opinion putting happiness in the satisfaction of appetite, when he says, *Blessed are the merciful*. But it should be known that in man are three appetites:

the irascible, which seeks revenge against enemies; this he rejects when he says, *Blessed are the meek*;
the concupiscible, whose good is to be joyful and gratified; he rejects this when he says, *Blessed are those who mourn*;
the will, which is twofold accordingly as it seeks two things: first, that it not be coerced by a higher law; secondly, that it be able to bind others as subjects; hence it desires to rule and not be subject. But the Lord shows the opposite of both.

In regard to the first he says, *Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after justice*.
As to the second, *Blessed are the merciful*. Therefore, they err who place happiness either in an abundance of external goods or in the satisfaction of appetite.

But those who place happiness in the acts of the active life, namely, moral acts, also err, but less so, because that is the road to happiness. Hence, the Lord does not reject them as evil, but shows that they are directed to happiness; because they are directed either to the self, as temperance and the like, and their end is a clean heart, because they make one overcome the passions. Or they are directed to another, and then their end is peace and so on, for peace is the work of justice. Consequently, those virtues are roads to happiness and not happiness itself; and this is *Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God*. He does not say, "They see," because this would be happiness itself. Again, *Blessed are the peacemakers*, not because they are peacemakers, but because they tend toward something else, *for they shall be called sons of God*.
But the opinion of those who say that happiness consists in contemplation of divine things the Lord rejects, as far as the time is concerned; because otherwise it is true, for the ultimate felicity consists in the vision of the best intelligible, namely, of God. Hence, he says, *they shall see*. It should be noted, according to the Philosopher, that in order for contemplative acts to make one happy, two things are required: the one substantially, namely, that it be the act concerned with he supreme intelligible, which is God; the other formally, namely, love and delight. For delight perfects happiness as beauty does youth. Therefore, the Lord presents two:

*they shall see God* and
*they shall be called sons of God*. For this pertains to the union of love: "See what love the Father has given us, that we should be called and be children of God" (1 Jn 3:1).

There should also be noted something in regard to merit in general and something in regard to reward in general. In regard to merit: that the Philosopher distinguishes two genera of virtues: one is common and perfects man in a human way; the other is special, which he calls heroic and perfects man in a superhuman way. For when a brave man fears where there should be fear, it is a virtue; but if he were not to fear, it would be a vice. But if he feared in no case, because he had confidence in God, that virtue would be superhuman; and those virtues are called divine. Therefore, those actions are perfect; and virtue, according to the Philosopher, leads to perfect action. Consequently, those merits are either actions of the gifts or acts of the virtues, in so far as they are made perfect by the gifts.

Note also that the acts of the virtues are the ones about which the law commands. But things meriting happiness are the acts of the virtues. Therefore, all things commanded and contained below are referred to those happinesses. Consequently, As Moses first set forth commands and later said many things, all of which were referred to the commands set forth; so Christ in his doctrine first set forth those beatitudes, to which all other things are referred. In regard to the reward it should be noted that God is the reward of those who serve him: "The Lord is my portion," says my soul, "therefore, will I hope in him" (Lam 3:24); "The Lord is my chosen portion and my cup" (Ps 16:5); "I am the Lord who brought you from Ur of the Chaldeans, to give you this land to possess" (Gen 15:7). And as Augustine says in *Confessions* II: "My soul departs from you, it seeks good things outside of you." But men seek various things; yet whatever can be found in any life, the Lord promised all in God.

For some place as the supreme good an abundance of wealth, through which thy can reach the loftiest dignity. The Lord promises a kingdom which includes both; but he says that one reaches this kingdom by the power of poverty, not of riches. Hence *Blessed are the poor*.
Others reach those honors through wars; but the Lord says, *Blessed are the meek*.
Others seek consolations through pleasures; the Lord says, *Blessed are those who mourn*.
Some are not willing to be made subject; but the Lord says, *Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after justice*.
Some wish to avoid evil by oppressing those under them; the Lord says, *Blessed are the merciful*. Some put the vision of God in the contemplation of truth in this life, but the Lord promises it in the future life; hence *Blessed are the clean of heart*.

It should also be noted that those rewards which the Lord mentions here can be possessed in two ways, namely, perfectly and consummately, and thus in heaven only or inchoately and imperfectly, and thus in this life. Hence, the saints have the beginning of that happiness. And because they cannot be explained as they will be in heaven, Augustine explains them as they are in this life. *Blessed*, therefore, *are the poor in spirit*, not in hope only, but also in reality: "The kingdom of heaven is within you" (Lk 17:21). With this as an introduction, let us proceed to the text.

In the beatitudes the evangelist does two things: first, the beatitudes are presented; secondly, the manifestation of these beatitudes: *Blessed are those who are persecuted for justice' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven*; for this is expressive of all the beatitudes. But virtue does three things: it removes from evil, does and makes one do good, and disposes one toward the best.

First, therefore, he deals with the first (v. 3); secondly, with the second (v. 6); thirdly, with the third (v. 8). Furthermore, virtue removes one from three evils: covetousness, cruelty or unrest, and harmful pleasures.

The first is noted in v. 3; the second in v. 7, the third in v. 4.

(3) He says, therefore, *Blessed are the poor*, i.e., the humble, who regard themselves as poor; for they are truly humble who regard themselves as poor not only in external, but also in internal things: "I am poor and needy" (Ps 40:17), contrary to Rev (3:17): "You say, I am rich, I have prospered, and need nothing; not knowing that your are wretched, pitiable, poor, blind, and naked." The *in spirit* can be understood in three ways.

For sometimes "spirit" refers to man's pride: "Turn away from a man whose breath is in his nostrils, for of what account is he?" (Is 2:22); it is called pride, because as wineskins are inflated with air, so men by pride: "Puffed up by his sensuous mind" (Col 2:18). Therefore, *Blessed are the poor*, i.e., those who have little of the spirit of pride.
Or "spirit" is taken for man's will. For some are humble of necessity and are not happy, but they pretend humility.
Thirdly, it is taken for the Holy Spirit; hence *blessed are the poor in spirit*, who are humble through the Holy Spirit. And those two practically turn out to be the same.

He says, *poor in spirit*, because humility gives the Holy Spirit: "This is the man to whom I will look, he that is humble and contrite in spirit, and trembles at my word" (Is 66:2). To those poor a kingdom is promised, in which is understood supreme excellence. And although it is the reward for every virtue, it is given in a special way to humility; because "everyone who humbles himself shall be exalted" (Mt 23:12); "He who is lowly in spirit will obtain honors" (Pr 29:22). Or another way, according to Jerome: *poor in spirit* literally, in disowning temporal goods. He says, *in spirit*, because some are poor by necessity, but happiness is not owed to such but to those who are poor by will.

The poor are described in two ways,

because even though some have riches, they do not have them in their heart: "If riches increase, set not your heart on them" (Ps 62:10).
Some neither have nor desire them, and that is more secure, because the mind is drawn from spiritual things by riches. And these are properly called *poor in spirit*, because the acts of the gifts, which are above the human way of acting, belong to the happy man. And that a man reject all riches, so that he does not seek them at all is also above the human way of acting. To those is promised the kingdom of heaven, which is marked not only by the loftiness of honor but by abundance of wealth: "Has not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith?" (Jas 2:5).

Note that Moses first promised riches: "The Lord your God will set you high above all the nations of the earth" (Dt 28:1), and in v. 3: "Blessed shall you be in the city and blessed in the field." Therefore, to distinguish the old law from the new, the Lord first places happiness in the contempt for temporal things.

Note also, according to Augustine, that this beatitude pertains to the gift of fear, because fear, particularly filial, makes one have reverence for God and, as a result, a man despises riches.

Note also that Isaiah presents the beatitudes in descending order: "There shall come forth a shoot from the stump of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and fear of the Lord, and his delight shall be in the fear of the Lord" (Is 11:1). Christ, on the other hand, begins with the gift of fear, namely, from poverty, because Isaiah foretold Christ's coming to earth; but Christ attracted his followers upwards from the earth.

(5) *Blessed are the meek*. This is the second beatitude. But lest anyone suppose that poverty is sufficient for happiness, he shows that it is not; indeed, meekness, which puts a restraint on anger is required, as temperance does to pleasures. For one is meek who is not irritated. But this could be done by a virtue, so that one does not become angry without just cause; however, even if you have a just cause and are not vexed, it is strictly beyond human power. Therefore he says, *Blessed are the meek*. For a struggle arises on account of an abundance of external goods; therefore, there would never be conflict, if man were not affected by riches. Hence those who are not meek are not poor in spirit. That is why he says immediately, *Blessed are the meek*. Note that this consists in two things: first, that a man not become angry; secondly, that if he becomes angry, he tempers the anger.

Thus Ambrose says: "It is the mark of a prudent man to temper movements to anger, nor is it less virtuous to get angry temperately than not to get angry at all. And in general I consider the latter milder, the former stronger."

Chrysostom says: "In the midst of eternal promises he places one which is earthly." Hence according to the letter the meek possess this earth. For many fight to acquire possessions, but frequently they lose life and everything else; whereas the meek often have the whole: "The Meek shall possess the land" (Ps 37:11). but it is better to explain it in reference to the future. Then it is explained in a number of ways.

Hilary, in this way: *They shall inherit the earth*,

i.e., the glorified body of Christ, because they will be conformed in their bodies to that brightness. "Your eyes will see the king in his beauty; they will behold a land that stretches far" (Is 33:17); "He will change our lowly body to be like his glorious body" (Phil 3:21).
Or in another way: this is the earth of the dead, because it is subject to corruption; but it will be freed from corruption, according to the Apostle (Rom 8:21). Therefore this earth, when it will be renewed and freed from the slavery of corruption, will be called the earth of the living.
Or by earth is understood the empyrean heaven, in which are the blessed; and it is called earth, because as earth is to heaven, so that heaven to the heaven of the Holy Trinity.
Or *they shall merit the earth*, i.e., their glorified body.

Augustine explains it metaphorically and says that "by this must be understood a certain stability of the saints in their knowledge of the first truth"; "I believe that I shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living" (Ps 27:13).

(4) The second beatitude is adapted to the gift of piety, because, properly speaking, those not content with the divine order get angry. *Blessed are those who mourn*. Two beatitudes, through which we are drawn from the evil of covetousness and cruelty, have been presented. Here is presented a third, by which we are drawn from the evil of harmful pleasure, and it is *Blessed are those who mourn*. In the Old Testament earthly things were promised and earthly happiness: "They shall be radiant over the goodness of the Lord, over the grain, the wine and the oil" (Jer 31:12). But contrariwise the Lord promises happiness in mourning. Yet is should be noted that not just any weeping is mourning, but that by which one weeps over a dead person beloved to him. For the Lord speaks here by hyperbole. As above he said, *Blessed are the poor*, so here he mentions the bitterest mourning; for as those who mourn the dead receive no consolation, so the Lord wishes our life to be a mourning: "Make mourning as for an only son" (Jer 6:26) This mourning can be expounded in three ways:

first, for sins, not only one's own but those of others; because if we mourn the bodily dead, much more the spiritually:"How long will you grieve over Saul?" (1 Sam 16:1); "O that my head were waters, and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people" (Jer 9:1). This beatitude is fittingly placed after the preceding one, for someone could say that it is enough not to do evil. This is true in the beginning before sin; but after sin has been committed, it is not enough, unless he makes satisfaction.
Secondly, it can be taken for the mourning about sojourning with present misery: "Woe is me, that my sojourning is prolonged" (Ps 120:5). This is watered above and below: "Caleb gave her the upper springs and the lower springs" (Jos 15:19).
Thirdly, according to Augustine, for mourning which men have in regard to the joys of the world, which they abandon by coming to Christ; for some men die to the world and the world dies to them: "By which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world" (Gal 6:14) But as we mourn over the dead, so they mourn; because one cannot escape the fact that in abandoning they feel some pain.

Three consolations correspond to these three kinds of mourning:

because for mourning over sins one is granted forgiveness, as David sought in Ps 51 (v. 12): "Restore to me the joy of my salvation."
To the postponement of the heavenly fatherland and the continued dwelling with present misery corresponds the consolation of eternal life: "I will turn their mourning into joy, I will comfort them and give them gladness for sorrow" (Jer 3:13); "You shall be comforted in Jerusalem" (Is 66:13).
Thirdly, to mourning corresponds the consolation of divine love; for when one weeps over the loss of a treasured object, he is consoled, if he acquires something more valuable.

Hence men are consoled, when in place of temporal they receive spiritual and eternal things, which is to receive the Holy Spirit; hence he is called Paraclete (Jn 15:26). For in virtue of the Holy Spirit, who is divine love, men rejoice: "Your sorrow will be turned into joy" (Jn 16:20)

It should be noted that this beatitude is associated with the gift of knowledge, because those morn who know others' misery; hence Wisdom (14:22) says of some who do not have such knowledge: "They live in great strife due to ignorance, and they call such great evils peace"; and on the other hand: "He who increases knowledge increases sorrow" (Ec 1:18).

It should also be noted that those rewards are so arranged that the subsequent always adds to the preceding. For, first, he said, *Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven*; then, *because they shall inherit the earth*. For it is better to possess than merely to have. Then, after these, *they shall be comforted*; for it is more to be comforted than to possess, because some posses things but are not delighted with them.

(6) Then, having given the beatitudes which pertain to removing evil, he now gives one which pertains to producing good. But our good is twofold, namely, of justice and of mercy. In regard to the first he says, *Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness [justice]*. Justice is taken in three ways according to Chrysostom and the Philosopher: sometimes for every virtue, which is called legal justice, which commands acts of the virtues. Hence, to the extent that a man obeys the law, he fulfills every virtue. In another way, in as much as it is a special virtue listed among the cardinal virtues and opposed to greed or injustice, and deals with buying and selling and hiring. Therefore, *you thirst after justice* can be understood in a general sense and in a specific sense.

If it is understood in a general sense, he says this for two reasons.

The first is Jerome's, who says that it is not enough that a man perform a work of justice, unless he acts with desire: "With free will I will sacrifice to you" (Ps 54:6); "My soul thirsts for God, for the living God" (Ps 42:2); "I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord" (Am 8:11). Therefore, it is thirst, when one acts with desire.
Another reason: Justice is twofold, perfect and imperfect. We cannot have the perfect in this world, because "if we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us" (1 Jn 1:8); "All our righteous deeds are like a polluted garment" (Is 64:6). But we have it in heaven: "Your people shall all be righteous; they shall possess the land forever" (Is 60:21). But we can have the desire for justice here; hence, he says, *Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for justice*. This is similar to what Pythagoras did. For in his time those who studied were called wise; but Pythagoras did not wish to be called wise, but a philosopher, i.e., a lover of wisdom. In like manner the Lord wishes that his people be and be called lovers of justice.

But if it be understood of specific justice, it consists in a man's rendering to each what is his due. Then it is fitting to state that *blessed are they...*, because hunger and thirst, properly speaking, pertain to the greedy. For those who desire to possess what belongs to others are never satiated; hence, that hunger about which the Lord speaks is opposed to that of the greedy. And the Lord wishes that we so yearn for that justice, that we are never, as it were, satiated in this life, as the greedy person is never satiated.

*For they shall be satisfied*. A fitting reward is mentioned, *they shall be satisfied*:

first, in the eternal vision, for they shall see God in his essence: "I shall be satisfied when your glory shall appear" (Ps 17:15). For nothing will remain to be desired there: "He who pursues righteousness and kindness will find life" (Pr 21:21).
Secondly, in the present, and this is twofold:

one is in spiritual goods, i.e., in fulfilling the commandments: "My food is to do the will of him who sent me, and to accomplish his work" (Jn 4:34).
In another way, it is taken for a fullness of temporal things. Unjust men are never satisfied, but men who have justice itself as their goal can go no further: "The just man eats and satisfies his soul" (Pr 13:25).

This beatitude, according to Augustine, is reduced to the gift of courage, namely, because it belongs to courage that a man act justly. Furthermore, the Lord adds something to the previous reward, because to be satisfied is to have one's desire totally fulfilled.

Note also that first he says *Blessed are those who mourn*, for when a man is infirm, he does not desire to eat; but he begins to desire when he begins to get well. So it is in matters of the spirit: when men are in sin, they do not feel spiritual hunger; but when their sins are forgiven, they experience that hunger. Therefore he continues at once: *Blessed are the merciful*, because justice without mercy is cruelty, while mercy without justice is the mother of destruction. Therefore, it is necessary for the two to be joined, as it says in Proverbs (3:3): "Let not mercy and truth forsake you"; "Mercy and truth will meet" (Ps 85:10).

(7) *Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy*. To be merciful is to have a compassionate heart for the wretchedness of others; but we have mercy toward the wretchedness of others, when we regard it as our own. But we grieve over our own wretchedness and strive to remove it. Therefore, you are truly merciful, when you work to relieve the wretchedness others; but we have mercy toward the wretchedness of others, when we regard it as our own. But we grieve over our own wretchedness and strive to remove it. Therefore, you are truly merciful, when you work to relieve the wretchedness of others. Now the wretchedness of our neighbor is twofold:

the first is in temporal matters, and in regard to that wretchedness we should have a compassionate heart: "If anyone has the world's goods and sees his brother in need, yet closes his heart against him, how does God's love abide in him?" (1 Jn 3:17).
The second is that whereby man is made wretched through sin; because just as happiness lies in the works of the virtues, so one's wretchedness lies in vices: "Sin makes a people wretched" (Pr 14:34). Therefore, when we admonish the fallen to return, we are merciful: "Seeing the crowds he had compassion on them" (Mt 9:36). Therefore, the merciful are blessed. And why? Because *they shall obtain mercy*.

Here it should be noted that God's gifts always outweigh our merits: "The Lord is the one who repays, and he will repay you sevenfold" (Sir 35:13). Consequently, the mercy God bestows on us is much greater than that we bestow on others. That mercy begins in this life in two ways:

first, because our sins are forgiven: "Who forgives all your iniquity" (Ps 103:3).
Secondly, because he removes temporal imperfections, so that he makes his sun to rise. This will be perfected in the future, when all wretchedness, both of guilt and punishment, will be removed: "Your mercy, O Lord, is in heaven" (Ps 36:6). And this is *because they shall obtain mercy*.

This beatitude is reduced to the gift of counsel, because this is unique counsel, that amid the dangers of this world we should obtain mercy: "Godliness is of value in every way" (1 Tim 4:8); "Let my counsel be acceptable to the king" (Dan 4:27).

(8) Thus have been presented the acts of virtues by which we are removed from evil and do good. Now are presented the acts by which we are disposed for the best; hence *Blessed are the pure in heart*.This beatitude consists in two things: in the vision of God and the love of neighbor. Hence, he first presents the beatitude pertaining to the vision of God; secondly, to the love of neighbor (v. 9). Therefore *Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God*.

But a literal question arises here. For we hold that God cannot be seen: "No one has ever seen God" (1 Jn 4:12). And lest someone say that, although no one sees him in the present life, he will see him in the future, the apostle dismisses this in 1 Timothy (6:16): "He dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has ever seen or can see." In regard to this it should be noted that there are various opinions.

For some have posited that God is never seen in his essence, but in some refulgence of his brightness. But a Gloss on Exodus (33:20): "Man shall not see me and live," rejects this for two reasons. First, because it conflicts with a text of Sacred Scripture: "We shall see him as he is" (1 Jn 3:2). Likewise, 1 Corinthians (13:12):"Now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face." It also conflicts with reason, because man's happiness is man's ultimate good, in which his desire is set at rest. But it is a natural desire that man, seeing effects, inquires about the cause; hence the wondering of philosophers was the origin of philosophy, because seeing effects, they wondered and searched for the cause. Therefore that desire is not set at rest until it arrives at the first cause, which is God, namely, at the divine essence. Therefore, he will be seen in his essence.
Others fell into a greater error by positing the contrary. They said that not only will we see God's essence with the eye of the mind, but also of the body, and that Christ sees the divine essence with a bodily eye. But this is not suitable,

as is clear first of all from the text presented here; for it would not say *Blessed are the clean of heart*, but "blessed are those with clean and pure eyes." Therefore it gives us to understand that he is not seen except by the heart, i.e., the intellect; for that is the way *heart* is taken here, as also in Ephesians (1:18): "Having the eyes of your hearts enlightened."
Secondly, because a bodily sense is restricted to its own object. But if it is said that it will have greater power then, the answer to be given is that then it would not be bodily vision, which sees only colors, and essences only incidentally, according to Augustine in *The city of God* (c. 19). For example, when we see a living thing, we can say that we see life, in as much as we see indications by which life is indicated to us. Similarly, in the divine vision, because the refulgence will be so great in the new heaven and new earth and the glorified bodies, we shall be said to see God through them as if with bodily eyes. Therefore *blessed are the pure in heart*...

The objection that "no one has ever seen God" is answered in three ways: first, because not with a comprehensive vision; secondly, not with bodily eyes; thirdly, not in this life. For if it were granted to anyone to see God in this life, this would be because he was totally alienated and raised above the bodily senses. Therefore it is stated, *Blessed are the pure in heart*; because, just as an eye seeing a color should be purified, so the mind seeing God: "Seek him in simplicity of heart, because he is found by him who does not put him to the test, and manifests himself to those who have faith in him" (Wis 1:1). For by faith is the heart purified: "He cleansed their hearts by faith" (Acts 15:9). And because vision succeeds faith, it is said, *for they shall see God. Blessed are the pure in heart*, i.e., who have a general cleanliness form alien thoughts. By such cleanliness their heart is a holy temple of God, in which they see God to be contemplated, for temple seems to be named form contemplation.

But in a particular way *blessed are the pure in heart*, i.e., who have cleanliness of the flesh; for nothing so impedes contemplation as bodily uncleanness: "Strive for peace with all men, and for the holiness without which no one will see the Lord" (Heb 12:14). Therefore some say that the moral virtues contribute to the contemplative live, and especially chastity. According to this, *blessed are the pure in heart*, can be understood of the vision in this life, for the saints with their heart full of righteousness see more clearly than others see by means of bodily effects. For the nearer the effects, the better God is known through them. Hence, the saints who have justice, charity and effects of that sort, which are most similar to God, know more than others: "Taste and see that the Lord is good" (Ps 34:8).

(9) *Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the sons of God*. This is the seventh beatitude and, as has been said, virtues disposing toward the best dispose toward two things, namely, to the vision of God and to love. And just as purity in heart disposes toward the vision of God, so peace disposes toward the love of God, by which we are called and are sons of God. Thus it disposes to the love of neighbor, because it says in 1 John (4:20): "He who does not love his brother whom he has seen, cannot love God whom he has not seen." And it should be noted that two rewards of beatitude are presented here, namely, *blessed are the peacemakers* and *blessed are those who suffer persecution for justice' sake*. And all the previous ones are reduced to those two and are their effect. For what is attained by poverty of spirit, by mourning, by meekness, but that a clean heart be had What by justice and mercy, but that we have peace? "The fruit of justice will be peace, and the result of justice quietness and trust forever" (Is 32:17). Therefore *blessed are the peacemakers*.

Let us now see what peace is and how we can attain it. Peace is the tranquility of order. Order is an arrangement of equal and unequal things, which assigns its own place to each. Therefore, peace lies in all things keeping their own places.

Hence, man's mind should first be subjected to God.
Secondly, the lower movements and powers, which are common to us and the beasts, should be subjected to reason; for it is through reason that man excels animals: "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth" (Gen 1:26).
Thirdly, that man be at peace with others, because in that way he will be completely set in proper order. But this arrangement in proper order is found only in holy men: "Great peace have they who love hour name" (Ps 119:165); "There is no peace for the wicked" (Is 48:22), for they cannot have inner peace: "They live in great strife due to ignorance, and they call such great evils peace" (Wis 14:22).

True peace the world cannot give: "Not as the world gives, do I give to you" (Jn 14:27). However, all this is not enough, but they should make peace between those in conflict: "Those who enter into the counsels of peace and joy" (Pr 12:20). Yet it should be noted that peace begins here, but it is not perfect, because no one can have his animal inclinations completely subject: "I see in my members another law at war with the law of my mind and making me captive to the law of sin which dwells in my members" (Rom 7:23). Hence it will be true in eternal life: "In peace I will both lie down and sleep" (Ps 4:8); "The peace of God surpasses all understanding" (Phil 4:7).

*Because they shall be called sons of God* for three reasons:

first, because they have the office of the Son of God. For the Son is said to have come into the world to assemble those who are scattered: "For he is our peace" (Eph 2:14); "Reconciling to himself all things, whether on earth or in heaven" (Col 1:20).
Secondly, because through peace with charity one reaches the eternal kingdom: "Why has he been numbered among the sons of God? And why is his lot among the saints?" (Wis 5:5); "Eager to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace" (Eph 4:3).
Thirdly, because by it man becomes like unto God; for where peace is, there is no resistance, and no one can resist God: "Who resisted him and had peace?" (Jb 9:4).

It should be noted that those beatitudes add something to one another. For it is a greater thing to obtain mercy than to be filled, because being full depends on one's capacity; but mercy is superabundant. Furthermore, not all who receive mercy are admitted by the king to see the king. Finally, it is a greater thing to be the king's son than to see the king. Yet it should be noted that by all these one only reward is designated.

But why did the Lord wish to signify that one reward by many? The answer is that all things which are separate among lower beings are assembled into one in the higher. And because in matters human they are found scattered, and we are led to God through sense-perceptible things, the Lord signified that one eternal reward by many rewards.

This seventh beatitude is adapted to the gift of wisdom, for wisdom makes men be children of God. It should also be noted that in the seventh beatitude is placed peace, and on the seventh day rest (Gen 2:2).

(10) Then the eight beatitude is presented. This one designates the perfection of all the preceding ones, for a man is perfect in all things when he abandons none on account of tribulations: "The kiln tests the potter's vessels, and the trial of tribulation just men" (Sir 27:5). *Blessed*, therefore, *are those who are persecuted for justice' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven*. But perhaps someone hearing, *blessed are the peacemakers*, will say that these are not happy on account of persecutions, because persecution disturbs the peace or totally destroys it; but certainly not inner but outer: "Great peace have those who love your law" (Ps 119:165).

Not the persecution itself, but its cause, makes one blessed; hence he says, *for justice' sake*: "If you suffer for justice's sake, you will be blessed" (1 Pt 3:14); "He does not say from the pagans and for the faith, but for justice' sake" (Chrysostom).

Thus he says: *for justice' sake*:: "If you suffer for justice's sake, you will be blessed" (1 Pt 3:14); "He does not say from the pagans and for the faith, but for justice' sake", because suffering from anyone and for any cause is not martyrdom, but suffering for justice' sake is. (Chrysostom). Sirach 4:33 *Struggel for justice*. The prophets were not killed because they (did not) deny the faith, but because they proclaimed the truth. John the Baptist was killed because the proclaimed the truth, and he was a martyr.]

Note that this beatitude is put in the eighth place, just as circumcision is done on the eighth day, which is a kind of general circumcision of the martyrs is foretoled. For theirs is the kingdom. This seems to come from what is placed in the first beatitude; thus the saints give different interpretations of it.

Some say that it is this beatitude is equivalent to *Blessed are the poor, for theirs...*, and that to designate the perfection of patience (cf. James 1:4). But perfection is always designated by what goes back to its beginning, as happens in a circle.
Again, he who suffers persecution for the sake of justice is poor, and everything else is owed to him, because he is *meek* and *merciful* etc. Therefore he has claim not only on the first reward, but all the others as well.
Others say that it is not the same. Thus Ambrose says that the kingdom of heaven has to do with the glory of soul and heart. For the kingdom of heaven corresponds to the soul, but the happiness that consists in thte glorification of the body corresponds to martyrdom, because of the tortures it undergoes.
Or otherwise: The kingdom of heaven is promised to the poor in hope, because they do not fly away immediately, but it is promised to martyrs as a possession, because they fly away immediately.]


## 5—3

Mt 5:13-16


> 13. You are the salt of the earth. But if the salt lose its savour, wherewith shall it be salted? It is good for nothing anymore but to be cast out, and to be trodden on by men. 14. You are the light of the world. A city seated on a mountain cannot be hid. 15. Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it may shine to all that are in the house. 16. So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.


## 5—4

Mt 5:17-19



## 5—5

Mt 5:20-26


> 20. For I tell you, that unless your justice abound more than that of the scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. 21. You have heard that it was said to them of old: Thou shalt not kill. And whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment. 22. But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgment. And whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council. And whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. 23. If therefore thou offer thy gift at the altar, and there thou remember that thy brother hath anything against thee; 24. Leave there thy offering before the altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy brother, and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift. 25. Be at agreement with thy adversary betimes, whilst thou art in the way with him: lest perhaps the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 26. Amen I say to thee, thou shalt not go out from thence till thou repay the last farthing.


## 5—6

Mt 5:27-30


> 27. You have heard that it was said to them of old: Thou shalt not commit adultery. 28. But I say to you, that whosoever shall look on a woman to lust after her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart. 29. And if thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee. For it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should perish, rather than thy whole body be cast into hell. 30. And if thy right hand scandalize thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is expedient for thee that one of thy members should perish, rather than that thy whole body go into hell.


## 5—7

Mt 5:31-32


> 31. And it hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorce. 32. But I say to you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, excepting the cause of fornication, maketh her to commit adultery: and he that shall marry her that is put away, committeth adultery.


## 5—8

Mt 5:33-37


> 33. Again you have heard that it was said to them of old, thou shalt not forswear thyself: but thou shalt perform thy oaths to the Lord. 34. But I say to you not to swear at all, neither by heaven for it is the throne of God. 35. Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king: 36. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black. 37. But let your speech be yea, yea: no, no: and that which is over and above these, is of evil.


## 5—9

Mt 5:38-42


> 38. You have heard that it hath been said: An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. 39. But I say to you not to resist evil: but if one strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to him also the other. And if a man will contend with thee in judgment, and take away thy coat, let go thy cloak also unto him. 41. And whosoever will force thee one mile, go with him other two. 42. Give to him that asketh of thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not away.


## 5—10

Mt 5:43-48


> 43. You have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thy enemy. 44. But I say to you, Love your enemies: do good to them that hate you: and pray for them that persecute and calumniate you: 45. That you may be the children of your Father who is in heaven, who maketh his sun to rise upon the good, and bad, and raineth upon the just and the unjust. 46. For if you love them that love you, what reward shall you have? do not even the publicans this? 47. And if you salute your brethren only, what do you more? do not also the heathens this? 48. Be you therefore perfect, as also your heavenly Father is perfect.
