# Chapter 8

**8—1

Mt 8:1-4**

1. And when he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him: 2. And behold a leper came and adored him, saying: Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. 3. And Jesus stretching forth his hand, touched him, saying: I will, be thou made clean. And forthwith his leprosy was cleansed. 4. And Jesus saith to him: See thou tell no man: but go, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.

It could seem that the Lord was speaking pretentiously; consequently, he proves his authority by signs. First are mentioned the signs by which men are freed from temporal dangers; secondly, from spiritual (c. 9).

In regard to the first he does two things: first, he presents the signs by which men are freed from dangers due to intrinsic causes; secondly, to extrinsic (v. 23).

He proves his authority, because immediately, because absent, because perfectly, because many. Immediately, in the case of the leper; absent, in the case of the centurion's servant; perfectly, in the case of Peter's mother-in-law; many, in the many others.

In regard to the first he does three things: first, the witnesses to the miracle are introduced; secondly, the leper is brought forward (v. 2); thirdly, help is offered (v. 3).

(1) He says, therefore, *When Jesus came down from the mountain...* The mountain is heaven: "The mountain which God desired for his abode" (Ps 68:16). Hence after he came down from heaven, *great crowds followed him*: "He emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men" (Phil 2:7). Or, by mountain is meant lofty doctrine: "Your justice is as God's mountains" (Ps 36:7). While he was in the mountain, i.e., while he led a loft life, his disciples followed him. *When he came down, great crowds followed him*; "I could not address you as spiritual men" (1 Cor 3:1).

(2) Secondly, the infirm man is introduced, and two things are done: first, the infirmity is named; secondly, concern is showed. The infirmity is leprosy, which signifies spiritual infirmities. Fro some infirmities are within, as fevers; but some, even though from within, show outward symptoms, as leprosy. Therefore, that leper is one whose evil will is manifested by an evil act: "We regarded him as a leper" (Is 58:4). But why does Luke (4:31 say that when he came to Capernaum, he cleansed the leper? The answer is that Matthew follows history, because when he was going to Capernaum, the leper appeared on the road.

The concern is showed, for first he came and then adored; hence he says *Behold, a leper came to him*. So, the sinner comes by faith and adores in humility: "The Lord saves the humble in spirit" (Ps 34:18). Then he confesses Christ's power: *Lord, if you will, you can make me clean*. He calls him Lord. If he is the Lord, he can heal: "Know that the Lord is God" (Ps 100:3). Then he puts his trust in God's mercy. There is no need to ask a merciful person, but only to show him your need; that is what he did: *Lord, if you will, you can make me clean*. Hence Ps 38 (v. 9): "Lord, all my longing is known to you, and my signing is not hidden from you." Then he shows Christ's wisdom, because he appeals only to his will; for he knows what is needed better than he. Therefore, he left it to Christ's wisdom.

Then he describes the help; first, he heals; secondly, he gives an instruction.

First, the deed; secondly, the effect (v. 3b).

(3) Christ does three things in the curing:

He stretches out his hand, when he gives help: "Put forth your hand from on high and rescue me" (Ps 144:7).
Sometimes he stretches out his hand, but does not touch: "I spread out my hands all the day to an unbelieving people" (Is 65:2);
sometimes he touches, and this is when he produces a change: "Touch the mountains" (i.e., the proud) "that they smoke" through compunction (Ps 144:5).

But why does he touch, since this was forbidden in the Law He did it to show that he is above the Law. It is read of Elisha that he did not touch Naaman, but sent him to the Jordan. Hence one who touches seems to break the Law. But in fact he id not break it, because it was forbidden on account of contagion. Therefore, because he could not be infected, he could touch. Furthermore, he touched in order to show his humanity; because it is not enough for a sinner to be subjected to God with regard to his divinity, but also with respect to his humanity. Again, he touched him in order to manifest the doctrine concerning the power in the sacraments; because both touch and words are required, for when the word is joined to the element, the sacrament comes to be.

*I will; be clean*. By this three errors are excluded. For it indicates a true body against the Manicheans. *I will* is against Apollinaris. By saying, *be clean*, he shows that he is true God, against Photinus. And the effect follows: *And immediately his leprosy was cleansed*, and he was cured. Chrysostom says that it was sooner than the words, "be clean," could be uttered; because the word takes time to say, but the cure was in an instant. *And he said to him*. Here he instructs him, for it would not be enough, if he cured him without instructing him: "I will instruct you and teach you" (Ps 32:9).

(4) First, he enjoins silence, *see that you say nothing to anyone*. Chrysostom: "Because he knew that the Jews interpreted his actions maliciously, he told him to say nothing to anyone. Or, another way: He said this as an example, for above he had taught us to hide good works; therefore, he sets the example that no one should glory in good works. *But go, show yourself to the priest*. Why does he say this? Because he had touched the leper, he did not wish to appear a total breaker of the Law. He sent to the priests in accordance with Lev (14:2). *And offer* your *gift...* Why? Because it was prescribed by the Law, that one cured of leprosy offer two turtle-doves. But according to this it seems that what the Lord commanded should still be observed. The answer is that the figures were not supposed to end until the truth was completely manifested. But this was not until after the resurrection.

*As a witness to them*. This is explained in two ways: *That Moses commanded as a witness to them*. By this he teaches that Moses' commands were a witness to Christ, as it says in John (5:46): "If you believed in Moses, you would perhaps believe me." Or, another way: *As a witness to them*, i.e., against those who saw the miracles and did not believe. Or, *as a witness to them* of your cure, for when they receive your offering, they cannot deny it. Furthermore, according to the mystical sense three things are enjoined by Christ: first, to be ashamed of sin; against those of whom Isaiah (3:9) says: "They proclaim their sin like Sodom, they do not hide it." Hence Sirach (4:25): "There is a shame that brings sin, and there is a shame that brings glory and grace." Furthermore, he should show himself to the priest by confessing: "Confess your sins to one another" (Jas 5:16). And here the Lord seems to command confessions. And immediately he was cured, because in the very contrition when one proposes to confess and to avoid sins, the sin is forgiven, accord gin to Psalm 32 (v. 5): "I said, 'I will confess my transgressions to the Lord'; and then you forgave the guilt of my sin." Likewise, satisfaction is enjoined, when he says, *offer*, your *gift*. Finally, he teaches observance of the commandments, when he says, *offer* your *gift*. Finally, he teaches observance of the commandments, when he says, *as Moses commanded*.

**8—2

Mt 8:5-13**

5. And when he had entered into Capharnaum, there came to him a centurion, beseeching him, 6. And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, and is grievously tormented. 7. And Jesus saith to him: I will come and heal him. 8. And the centurion, making answer, said: Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof; but only say the word, and my servant shall be healed. 9. For I also am a man subject to authority, having under me soldiers; and I say to this, Go, and he goeth, and to another Come, and he cometh, and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. 10. And Jesus hearing this, marvelled; and said to them that followed him. Amen I say to you, I have not found so great faith in Israel. 11. And I say to you that many shall come from the east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven: 12. But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into the exterior darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 13. And Jesus said to the centurion: Go, and as thou hast believed, so be it done to thee. And the servant was healed at the same hour.

*As he entered Capernaum*. Here is shown Christ's power in his absence. First, the piety and faith of the centurion are shown; secondly, the humility (v. 8).

In regard to the first, two things are shown: first, the piety of the centurion; secondly, Christ's kindness.

In regard to the first, three things: first, the place is mentioned; secondly, the request is described (v. 6); thirdly, the response is given (v. 7).

(5) First, the place: *As he entered Capernaum*, which is interpreted "villa of fatness", namely, "villa of the Gentiles", which flowed with the fatness of devotion: "My soul is feasted as with marrow and fat" (Ps 63:5). *A centurion came forward to him*. But there is a question here, because Luke (7:3) says that he sent priests. Augustine says he did not come in person, but the statement that he came refers to his intention; because he does a thing by whose authority it is done. Chrysostom, on the other hand, says that he was set over one hundred soldiers and, therefore, he was a governor. Hence the Jews, wishing to curry favor in order to obtain his good will, said to him: Lord, we will go and intercede for you. Then to satisfy them, he permitted them to go, but he followed them later.

This miracle differs from the other in three ways, because the first was performed on a Jew, the second on a gentile. This gives us to understand that Christ came not only for the Jews but also for the gentiles. Again, in the first the Jew approached him, but the gentile did not. This was because the Lord is merciful to some at their own request, to others through the intercession of others. Also, that centurion can be taken as an angel presiding there for the salvation of the gentiles, or the first fruits of the gentiles. Finally, the first was a leper, in whom was uncleanness. But paralytics are people who cannot move their members. Lepers are intemperate, and paralytics incontinent. Paralytics are those who sin through weakness; lepers, from certain malice. By the centurion can be understood the mind: "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind" (Eph 4:23).

(6) He says, *Lord, my servant is lying paralyzed at home*. In this is shown the centurion's kindness, because he entreats in this way for a servant. Hence he does what is stated in Sirach (33:31): "If you have a faithful servant, let him be to you as your won soul." And that servant is said to be the lower part of the soul. He says, therefore, that he is lying down and in terrible distress. He speaks from affection, because when one loves someone, he regards a slight sickness as grave. The lower part of the soul, therefore, is lying down, when it cannot arise: "The flesh lusts against the spirit" (Gal 5:17) and is in terrible distress. Wonton men rejoice: "They rejoice in doing evil, and delight in the perverseness of evil" (Pr 2:14). But those in pain, since they sin from weakness, are sorrowful when they fall. And so they are terribly distressed in their sorrow.

(7) *And Jesus said to him, "I will come and heal him.,"* i.e., I will not speak. Hence note that no one would dare request as much as the Lord could grant. He says, *I will come and heal him*, because the presence of Christ is the cause of health. But it should be noted that he did not wish to go to the ruler's son, but he did go to the servant. This would be contrary to many who are willing to visit only the great, in opposition to Sirach (4:7): "Make yourself beloved to the assembly of the poor."

(8) He continues, *But the centurion answered him...* Much has been made of the kindness and faith of the centurion; now the humility that accompanied his faith is shown. First, therefore, his humility and faith are presented; secondly, the kindness of Christ (v. 10). In regard to the first he does three things: first, he protests his unworthiness; secondly, Christ's power; thirdly, he suggests a comparison. The Lord presented himself as kind; but because he was a gentile, he considered himself unworthy, saying, *Lord I am not worthy...* In the same way Peter said: "Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man" (Lk 5:8). Augustine says that by professing himself unworthy, he made himself worthy. And as he said, so we, too, should say: "I am not worthy that you should enter my body. Then the faith of the centurion confessing Christ's power is mentioned: *Only say the word and my servant will be healed*, because, as it says in Wisdom (16:12), "For neither herb nor poultice cured them, but it was your word, O Lord"; and in Psalm 107 (v. 20): "He sent forth his word and healed them."

(9) Then he states the comparison and proves the greater from the lesser. First, he describes the order of ran; secondly, the power (v. 9). The order is that some are over others, but do not have others over them; some are over others, but have another over them; some are under others and have none under them. Some, therefore, are in between, as he was; for he was under a tribune, but had soldiers under him. Hence he says, *I say to one, "Go," and he goes, and to another, "Come," and he comes.* In this, obedience is recommended to us: "Obey your prelates and be subject to them" (Heb 13:4). He also had other servants in charge of fodder: "Fodder and a stick and burdens for an ass; bread and discipline and work for a servant" (Sir 33:24). *And to my servant, "Do this," and he does it*. Hence he wishes to argue from the lesser; because if I, who am under authority, can do this, how much more the Lord of lords... But it should be recognized that rational creatures are free and are as soldiers: "Is there any number to his soldiers?" (Jb 25:3). Therefore, he is called the Lord of armies. But the irrational creature is under servile subjection, because it does not have the faculty of free will. Therefore, he wants to point out that since nature obeys your commands, command nature and it obeys you, because your word is full of judgment. It should be noted that this twofold authority is found in the soul; for the soul rules over the body, and the reason rules the irascible and concupiscible appetites. The first is a dominant power, because at the soul's command the body is moved; the second rules the others by a kind of commanding or regal power; hence they have certain movement initiated on their won. These are like soldiers: "What causes wars, and what causes fightings among you? Is it not your passions that are at war in your members?" (Jas 4:1); "I beseech you to abstain from the passions of the flesh that wage war against your soul" (1 Pt 2:11). Therefore, we ought to say *"Go"* to evil manners, and *"Come"* to good manners, and to this servant *"Do this."* Hence we should busy the body with work, so that as you once yielded your body to impurity and to greater and greater iniquity, so now yield your members to righteousness for sanctification" (Rom 6:19).

(10) *When Jesus heard him, he marveled...* Here he touches on Christ's kindness. But how can he say, *he marveled* ? for marveling finds no place in God, because it arises from ignorance of a cause, which cannot occur in God. But it is also due to apprehending the greatness of an effect and takes place through imagining and phantasizing some great effect. In this sense it can take place even Chris; hence he marveled, i.e., regarded something as great, and expressed it to the crowd following. Then he commended him; hence he said to those following, *I have not found such faith in Israel*. But what is this? Was there not greater faith in Abraham, Isaac and Jacob? The answer is that there was; but Christ's statement is understood of his time. But then there is a question about the apostles, and Martha an Mary. I must say that his faith was greater, because he had seen nothing previously, as those who had seen miracles. Furthermore, Peter came at Andrew's invitation, and Andrew at John's. In Martha was a slight doubt, because she said: "Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died" (Jn 9:21), as though he could not have prevented it in his absence. But in the centurion's words there was no hint of doubt. Chrysostom explains it another way, namely, that great and small are not said in an absolute way, but relatively; as we say that many are in a house, but few in a stadium. Hence, *I have not found such faith in Israel*, namely, in relation to the gentiles: "The sojourner who dwells in your land shall mount above you higher and higher" (Dt 28:43).

(11) *I tell you...* On this occasion he compares Jews and gentiles: first, he treats of the call of the gentiles; secondly, of the rejection of the Jews.

*I tell you, many will come from the east and the west...* This is said relatively, because "many are called, but few are chosen: (Mt 20:16). *From the east and west*. By this is meant the entire world. Or, *from the eat*, in prosperous times; *and the west*, i.e., adverse times. Or, *from the east*, in youth; *and west*, old age. *And sit [recline] at table*. This reclining is the wealth of spiritual things, namely, in contemplation: "Behold, I appoint for you a kingdom, that you may sit and drink at my table in my kingdom" (Lk 22:29); "Behold, my servants shall eat, but you shall be hungry; behold, my servants shall drink, but you shall be thirsty" (Is 65:13).

[But why *with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob* ? Because the gentiles are justified by faith, like the Jews, as is said in Romans 4:12 and Genesis 12. Also, the promise was made to them, because *in your seed all nations will be blessed*, Gen. 15:18. Therefore they will rest with their fathers.]

(12) He continues: *The sons of the kingdom shall be thrown into outer darkness*. Here he shows the rejection of the Jews and describes the punishment of damnation, because they will lose good things and incur evils. He says, *the sons of the kingdom*, because God reigned in them: "In Judah God is known, his name is great in Israel" (Ps 76:1). Also, they were slaves to the figures of the Law. Furthermore, the promise was made to them (Rom 4:13). *Will be thrown into the outer darkness*. This is the punishment of damnation. Then he enumerates the evils they will incur; because those who first incurred inner darkness in the intellect will later be thrown into the outer darkness, for they will be entirely estranged from God, who is the true light: "For almsgiving delivers form death and keeps you from entering the darkness" (Tb 4:11). Then, in regard to its effect, *there will be weeping*. Weeping is the messenger of pain: "My servants shall sing for gladness of heart, but you shall cry out for pain of heart" (Is 65:14). Then bodily suffering is mentioned, *gnashing of teeth*. For they will have bodies in the resurrection: "Condemnation is ready for scoffers, and flogging for the backs of fools" (Pr 19:29). The pain pertains to the concupiscible appetite, the gnashing to the irascible. Or, according to Jerome, both pertain to bodily pain, because the resurrection will include not only the soul but the body; and there will be intense heat and cold: "They will pass from the snow waters to extreme heat" (Jb 24:19).

(13) God's kindness is shown, when he says, *And Jesus said to the centurion, "Go; be it done for you as you have believed*. But the effect follows: *and the servant was healed*, because his word was full of power (Ec 8:4).

**8—3

Mt 8:14-27**

14. And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother lying, and sick of a fever; 15. And he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she arose and ministered to them. 16. And when evening was come, they brought to him many that were possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word: and all that were sick he healed: 17. That it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the prophet Isaias, saying: He took our infirmities, and bore our diseases. 18. And Jesus seeing great multitudes about him, gave orders to pass over the water. 19. And a certain scribe came and said to him: Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou shalt go. 20. And Jesus saith to him: The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 21. And another of his disciples said to him: Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father. 22. But Jesus said to him: Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead. 23. And when he entered into the boat, his disciples followed him: 24. And behold a great tempest arose in the sea, so that the boat was covered with waves, but he was asleep. 25. And they came to him, and awaked him, saying: Lord, save us, we perish. 26. And Jesus saith to them: Why are you fearful, O ye of little faith? Then rising up, he commanded the winds, and the sea, and there came a great calm. 27. But the men wondered, saying: What manner of man is this, for the winds and the sea obey him?

(14) *And when Jesus entered Peter's house...* Christ's power has been commended in the cure of the leper and in the quick cure of the centurion's servant; here it is commended in a perfect cure. First, he describes the place of the cure; secondly, the kind of infirmity; thirdly, Christ's help; fourthly, the effect of the cure. He says, therefore, *when Jesus entered...* The evangelist does not tell when this happened, but both Luke and Mark pass over it to other matters.

*He entered Peter's house*. Here we can consider three things: first, the honor he showed his disciple, because he did not choose to go to the centurion's house; yet he went to the house of a poor fisherman: "Your friends have been exceedingly honored, O God" (Ps 139:17). Secondly, he gave an example of humility, because nothing is more pleasing to the Lord: "In meekness receive the implanted word, which is able to save your souls" (Jas 1:21). Thirdly, the reverence of Christ for Peter, because he offered himself, even though Peter did not ask.

*He saw his mother-in-law*, namely, with the eyes of the mind: "I have seen the affliction of my people in Egypt" (Ex 3:7). *Peter's mother-in-law*. By this can be understood the synagogue: "He who worked through Peter for the mission to the circumcised worked through me also for the gentiles" (Gal 2:8). She, namely, the synagogue, had a fever &8212;the fever of envy. Or by that mother-in-law is understood the soul ablaze with the fire of concupiscence.

(15) *He touched her hand*. Here he mentions the cure. Chrysostom asks why he cured the centurion's servant with a mere word, but her with a touch. And he answers on account of acquaintanceship; and in this he also shows his humility better. Therefore, he gave help by touch: "You have held my right hand" (Ps 73:23). *And she rose*. People with a fever are ordinarily weaker when they begin to improve than they were in the course of the sickness; but this was not the case here, because the Lord restored her to complete health: for "God's works are perfect" (Dt 3:4). Indeed, the Lord cures in one way and nature in another. Therefore, he says, *she served him*.

(16) *That evening...* Here God's power is confirmed: first, the evangelist mentions the multitude; secondly, he quotes a text of scripture. He says, therefore, that he cured demoniacs and sick people. By demoniacs can be understood those who sin from malice; by the sick, those who sin from ignorance. Hence he says, *that evening*; consequently, note that this was not on the Sabbath day, when they held it was not fitting to cure, but in the evening when the Sabbath was over. *They brought to him many who were possessed with demons*. Or, it is called evening, because our Savior came in the evening: "The sun rises and sets," i.e., Christ (Ec 1:5). *He cast out* merely with a rebuke; hence at the mere sound of his voice the demons fled. *And all who were sick*, so that the words of Acts (10:38) apply to him: "He freed all possessed by the devil.

(17) It should be noted that the evangelists have not recounted all of Christ's miracles, but the better known. 'and because it seemed marvelous to cure so many, he supports it with a text from Isaiah (53:4): " *He took our infirmities and bore our diseases.* " And although it does not follow the order of the text, let us explain it as presented. *He too k our infirmities*, where infirmities refer to light signs; and *diseases*, i.e., greater sins, *he bore*, i.e., carried away. Or, since he is the power and wisdom of God, our infirmities of suffering and death. Hence he assumed a body subject to suffering, in order to take away our infirmity and sickness: "He bore our sins in his body, that we might die to sin and live to righteousness" (1 Pt 2:24). But since the text from Isaiah spoke of sins, why does this quotation speak of bodily infirmities? The reason is that very often bodily infirmities arise from spiritual sins.

(18) *Now when Jesus saw great crowds...* After the miracles against internal sins the evangelist mentions miracles against external sins, namely, a storm. First, he mentions the prologue to the miracle, namely, the embarkation; secondly, the miracle, (v. 26b); thirdly, the effect (v. 26c).

In regard to the first he mentions the command; secondly, its fulfillment (v. 21).

In regard to the first he does three things: first, he tells them to follow; secondly, he turns away a person who intruded himself (v. 19); thirdly, he makes something clear to another disciple (v. 21).

He says, therefore, *When Jesus saw great crowds around him...* But why did he enter a ship? For two reasons: first, to indicate the weakness of human nature; secondly, to please the disciples. Hence sometimes he climbs a mountain with the disciples, sometimes he goes into the desert, sometimes into a boat. Also to give us an example not to seek the favor of men. Finally, to remove the envy of the Jews: "A smoking wick he will not quench: (Is 42:3).

(19) He continues, *and a scribe came up*. And it seems he came very devoutly; so why does he turn him away? Jerome: "Because he did not have good faith." And this is clear, because he merely called him master; but true disciples called him Lord. Hence John (13:13): "You call me Master and Lord." Again, he wanted to follow him from an evil intent, because he heard that a sign had been performed; so he wished to follow, in order that he, too, might perform signs, as is said of Simon Magus. Chrysostom says what he sinned in another way, namely, by pride, because he drew apart from the others. Hence he regarded himself worthier than the rest. Hilary interprets his words as a question: "Master, shall I follow you?" His fault was that he asked something about which he was certain, and put in doubt something he was suppose to do.

(20) He continues, *Foxes have holes...* Jerome explains that God responds to the intention, as he often does. He wished to follow, but his eye was on gain. Against this the Lord stresses poverty: *Foxes have holes and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man has nowhere to lay his head*; as it says in 2 Corinthians (8:9): "Thought he was rich, et for your sake he became poor." According to Augustine he notes three vices in him: the vice of deceit, because he had honey on his lips and venom in his heart, as it says in Psalm 12 (v. 2). Secondly, pride, when he said, *The birds of the air*, by which is understood pride. Or, by *birds*, demons, as below (13:4): "And the birds of the air came and ate it up Thirdly, unbelief, because he was not in the state of charity, which is in us through faith.

(21) He continues, *Another of the disciples said to him*. The first intruded himself, but this one excuses himself. The reproval of this one is indicated, when he says, *Jesus said to him, "Follow me..." Lord, let me first go and bury my father*. There is a great difference between this one and the other. He calls him Lord, the other called him Master. The first revealed deceit, the other piety because of the commandment to honor one's father; hence he begged for a delay. Something similar is found in 1 Kings (19:20) concerning Elijah.

(22) The reproof follows: *Follow me*, for one who wishes to follow Christ must not postpone it for some temporal matter; hence Ps 45 (v. 10): "Forget your people and your father's house." He commanded this, because there were others who could bury him. Consequently, he said, *Leave the dead to bury their own dead*. Furthermore, it often happens that one prevented by one matter soon runs into another, since one brings on another. Thus, if he had gone to bury his father, he might then have thoughts about the will; as a result he would possibly withdraw altogether: "Woe to you who draw iniquity with cords of falsehood" (Is 5:18). Hence there was no cruelty here. Thus, if we se someone over-affected by the death of his father, he is banned from the funeral on account of the danger suggested in Sirach (30:25): "Sorrow has killed many." But he says, *dead*, in the plural, because he was dead in two ways, namely, the death of unbelief and bodily death. Hence he was dead both in body and in soul.

Therefore, he gives four admonitions:

first, that a person called to the state of perfection should not regard his father with excessive affection: "You have one Father, who is in heaven: (Mt 23:9).
The second is that family affection be set aside: "If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple" (Lk 14:26). This is true, when father and mother withdraw one from God.
The third is that no commemoration of unbelievers be made by the saints.
The fourth is that everyone living outside Christ is dead, according to Gregory.

(23) *And when he got into the boat...* We have mentioned the Lord's command to pass over to the other side. Here the execution of the command is mentioned. For his miracles on land had been seen; now he wishes to manifest himself on water, in order to show that he is Lord of earth and sea. By this boat is understood the Church, or the Cross of Christ; hence Wisdom (14:5) can be applied to it: "Men trust their lives even to the smallest piece of wood." The Lord's disciples follow him in the Church by submitting to the commandments. They also follow him ascending the Cross: "Through him the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world" (Gal 6:14).

(24) Then the miracle is described: first, the impending danger; secondly, the disciples' pleading (v. 25); thirdly, the response. *There arose a great storm on the sea*. The saints say that the storm did not arise from the inclemency of the air, but by divine arrangement. And it happened for a number of reasons:

first, in order that the disciples, who had been loved and selected in a special way, might experience something humiliating and not extol themselves. This signified the coming danger they would experience at the time of the Passion. After this, as Paul says in 2 Corinthians (1:8): "We were so utterly crushed, that we despaired of life itself."
Secondly, in order that they might learn to live in danger and overcome: "In all these we overcome on account of him who loved us" (Rom 8:37).
Thirdly, Chrysostom explains that they were destined to preach what they had witnessed about Christ; consequently, in order that they have more experience with miracles and be more certain, the Lord wished them to undergo this. Hence Psalm 66 (v. 5): "Come and see what God has done." For they could more easily recall things in which they were involved.

*But he was asleep*. This was in order to show that he was true man; in all cases where he wished to show that he was God, he also showed something of his humanity. He also slept, because "He was born in the likeness of man' (Phil 2:7). For he was not asleep in regard to his divinity: "He who keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep" (Ps 121:4). Also, he slept in order that they be placed between fear and hope. Another reason was that he might show his uniqueness, because he remained undisturbed in such a storm: "When he established the fountains of the deep, when he assigned to the sea its limit, so that the waters might not transgress his command" (Pr 8:29).

(25) He continues with the disciples' pleading: *They went and woke him*. For the wind was so violent, that he should have been awakened. Now all this was said in a figure of Jonah, because Jonah was asleep on a boat and the sailors woke him to call on his God, but the disciples to save themselves. Hence they say, *"Save us, O Lord, we are perishing."* First, they confess his power, when they say, *Lord*: "You rule the raging of the sea; when its waves rise, you still them" (Ps 89 (v. 9). They seek help, because they know him to be the Savior: "He will come and save us" (Is 35:4). Likewise, they express the danger in earthly things. Here in Christ's sleep is signified his death, and he was roused by the resurrection. Or, he is said to be asleep during the trials and tribulations of the saints and is awakened by their prayers. Hence Psalm 41 (v. 10): "O Lord, be gracious to me, and raise me up." He is also asleep in the slothful; hence he must be roused, as Paul advises in Ephesians (5:14): "Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give you light."

(26) Then he tells how he helped: *Why are you afraid, O men of little faith?* It seems that they were not men of little faith, because they said, *Save us*; but they really were of little faith, because they did not believe that he could save them even when sleeping. Or, *of little faith*, because if they had great faith, they could have commanded the sea. *Then he rose and rebuked the winds*; for a storm arises from winds as from an efficient cause, and from water as a material cause. And he commanded both: "He made the storm be still" (Ps 107:29). And that is what is stated here, *and there was a great calm*. But ordinarily, when there is a storm, the sea is not completely calm even after two days. Therefore, in order that the miracle appear perfect, the great calm occurred immediately, because "God's works are perfect" (Dt 32:4).

(27) *And the men marveled...* Here is mentioned the effect, namely, the men's admiration. When he says, *men*, it does not mean the apostles, because they are never referred to in that manner, but it refers to the sailors. Or, according to Jerome, even if it refers to the apostles, it might be that they could doubt as the men did, saying, *What sort of man is this?* Chrysostom: "They say, *man*; for since they saw him sleeping, they called him a man, but because they saw a sing of his divinity, they were confused. *Even winds and sea obey him*, because every creature obeys its Creator: "Fire and hail, snow and frost, stormy wind fulfill his command" (Ps 148:8); not because they have a rational soul, but because they behave after the manner of one who is obedient, as the hands and bodily members obey the soul, for they are moved immediately at its pleasure, so all things obey God.

**8—4

Mt 8:28-34**

28. And when he was come on the other side of the water, into the country of the Gerasens, there met him two that were possessed with devils, coming out of the sepulchres, exceeding fierce, so that none could pass by that way. 29. And behold they cried out, saying: What have we to do with thee, Jesus Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time? 30. And there was, not far from them, a herd of many swine feeding. 31. And the devils besought him, saying: If thou cast us out hence, send us into the herd of swine. 32. And he said to them: Go. But they going out went into the swine, and behold the whole herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea: and they perished in the waters. 33. And they that kept them fled: and coming into the city, told every thing, and concerning them that had been possessed by the devils. 34. And behold the whole city went out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they besought him that he would depart from their coast.

(28) He continues: *And when he came to the other side...* Because mention has been made of miracles by which the Lord freed many from external dangers, here are mentioned miracles by which some are freed from internal or spiritual dangers. First, the miracle is mentioned; secondly, the effect (v. 32b). In regard to the first: first is shown the malice of the demons as to the fierceness they exercise against men; secondly, as to uneasiness (v. 29; thirdly, as to wickedness (v. 31). In regard to the first: the place is described; secondly, the ferocity of the demons.

The place was the region of the Gerasenes. "Gerass" means "ejecting the colonist" or "the approaching stranger", because it was near the gentiles. *Two demoniacs met him*. Ferocity is shown, first, because he oppressed them; secondly, because they tried to deceive men. But why di the other evangelists mention only one, but he two? The answer is that there were certainly two, but one was better known. And they were fierce, because they harmed not only in a bodily way but also spiritually. Hence they dwelt among the tombs, in order to strike men with terror. Hence the opinion was erroneous, that the demons could return a souls to a dead body, as we read of Simon Magus. But this was not so, because demons pretended in order to deceive men. Hence Porphyry says that the race of devils is fallacious. Therefore, those wizards generally use the bodies of the dead; hence the demons live in the tombs: "You live in tombs and sleep in the shrines of idols" (Is 35:4). For they were so fierce *that no one could pass that way*: "In the path where I walk the proud", i.e., the demons, "have hidden a trap for me" (Ps 142:3).

(29) Their uneasiness is shown, because they did not endure the presence of Christ; hence it is said that *they cried out*: "You shall cry out for pain of heart, and shall wail for anguish of spirit" (Is 65:14). Then they admit God's power, saying, *What have you to do with us, Son of God?* Absolutely nothing, because there is no conformity between God and Belial. But why did they say this? Because they were seriously afflicting men, and they had heard that Christ would take their power from them. Hence they were really saying: Although we have harmed others, we have done you no harm; therefore, you should not molest us. Again, they were confessing him Son of God. In this the Arians are embarrassed, because if they do not believe the saints, they might at least believe the demons. But it seems that they did not know him, because 1 Corinthians (2:8) says that "if they had known, they would never have crucified the king of glory." The answer is that when the Lord wished, he showed his humanity, but in a way that concealed it from them.

*Have you come here to torment us before the time?* The demons know that on the day of judgment they must undergo greater torment; when it is said: "Depart you accursed into eternal fire" (Mt 25:41). Some also believe that until the day of judgment the demons do not suffer the punishment of sense but the punishment of damnation. They believe this on account of that phrase, *before the time*. But Damascene does not accept this: "What death is for men, the fall is for the demons. But when men die, they receive the punishment of sense at once; so also the angels who fall." Some say that the devils always carry their own fire with them. But how can this be, for that fire is corporeal? The answer is that although the fire is corporeal, it possesses something spiritual; hence it tortures them after the manner of something that fetters. For the spirit exceeds the nature of a body; but God binds spirits to bodies, as when the soul is bound to a body, it confers on that body the ability to be moved in accordance with the will of the soul. Just as if a prelacy is given to someone in some church, but he does not reside in it; so, although this fire is corporeal, it can act by reason of something spiritual. *To torment us...* They regard it as great torment not to be able to harm men. But if they were in hell, they would not be able to harm them thus; and so it is a great torment for them to enter hell.

(30) *Now a herd of many swine was feeding at some distance from them*. Here he touches on their malice, because they harm not only men but animals as well. Hence it is clear that this did not take place in Judea, because the Jews do not use swine.

(31) *If you cast us out, send us out into the swine*. But why did they not ask that he send them into men? Because they saw that he was solicitous about caring for men. But why into the herd of swine? Because they were close by. Also because it is a very unclean animal. So, to designate uncleanness, he permits them to enter the swine. And this seems to be signified in Job (41)3): "Will he multiply supplications to you? Will he speak soft words to you?"

(32) Christ's concession follows: *And he said to them, "Go."* But the Lord seems to have heard the demons. It should be said that he did not hear, but in his wisdom he permitted what happened, to show the malice of the demons; because if the Lord had not restrained them, they would have rushed into men as they rushed into the swine. But when the Lord permitted some demons, he did not permit entirely; for he put a restriction on them as in Job (2:6). Hence to designate this he permitted them to enter the swine. Also, to show that they could do nothing without God's permission; again, so that man might recognize his own dignity, since he permitted so many swine to be killed for the welfare of one man.

The execution of the command follows: *And the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the sea*. In this is signified that no one can be entirely destroyed by the devil, unless he presents himself as swine, i.e., entirely unclean. Hence Revelation (18:21): "So shall Babylon, the great city, be thrown down with violence"; "But these, like irrational animals, receiving the reward of their unrighteousness" (2 Pt 2:13).

(33) He continues with the amazement of the swineherds: *Hence the herdsmen fled* and told everything. They told something sad and something joyful: sad about the swine, but joyful about the cured demoniac. By those herdsmen are signified the synagogue rulers, who for the sake of temporal things contradict Christ as much as they can.

(34) Then he mentions the amazement of the entire populace, *and the whole city went out to meet Jesus; and when they saw him, they begged him to leave their neighborhood*. But why? Because he had caused them a great loss. Therefore, they feared that if he stayed there longer, he would cause more. In the same way some fear to be with Christ on account of temporal loss, as Isaiah (30:11) says: "Leave the way, turn aside from the path, let us hear no more of the holy one of Israel." Or, another way: they acted not from malice but from devotion, because they regarded themselves unworthy. Peter says something similar: "Depart from me, because I am a sinful man" (Lk 5:8).
