# Chapter 7

> 1. Judge not, that you may not be judged. 2. For with what judgment you judge, you shall be judged: and with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. 3. And why seest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye; and seest not the beam that is in thy own eye? 4. Or how sayest thou to thy brother: Let me cast the mote out of thy eye; and behold a beam is in thy own eye? 5. Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thy own eye, and then shalt thou see to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye. 6. Give not that which is holy to dogs; neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and turning upon you, they tear you. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find: knock, and it shall be opened to you. 8. For every one that asketh, receiveth: and he that seeketh, findeth: and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened. 9. Or what man is there among you, of whom if his son shall ask bread, will he reach him a stone? 10. Or if he shall ask him a fish, will he reach him a serpent? 11. If you then being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children: how much more will your Father who is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him? 12. All things therefore whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do you also to them. For this is the law and the prophets. 13. Enter ye in at the narrow gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there are who go in thereat. 14. How narrow is the gate, and strait is the way that leadeth to life: and few there are that find it!

(1) Having completed the Law in regard to the precepts and promises, he completes it now in regard to judgments. First, he dictates that judgment not be rash and says, *Judge not...*, i.e., from the bitterness of hatred: "You have turned judgment into bitterness" (Am 6;13). Or, *Judge not* those matters that have not been entrusted to us. Judgment belongs to God, who has entrusted us with judging externals, but he has reserved internals to himself. Do not, therefore, judge about them: "Do not judge before the time" (1 Cor 4:5); "The heart of man is deceitful, and who can understand it?" (Jer 17:9). For no one ought to judge that another is an evil man, for doubts must be interpreted in the more favorable light. Likewise, judgment should be congruent to the person judging. Hence, if you are in the same sin or greater, you ought not judge: "For in passing judgment on another, you condemn yourself" (Rom 2:1). Likewise, it is not forbidden to prelates, but to subjects; hence they should judge only a subject. But Chrysostom: " *Judge not...*, i.e., do not judge to vindicate yourselves. Hence, if you forgive, you will not thereby be judged; rather, by reason of this mercy you will obtain mercy."

(2) The reason follows: *For with the judgment you pronounce, you will be judged*, i.e., according the judgment with which you have judged you will be judged: "The wicked are ensnared in the work of their own hands" (Ps 9:16); and below (26:52): "He that strikes with the sword shall die by the sword." Or, in this way: Those who judge should fear that the Lord might allow them to be punished with this judgment: "Woe to you, destroyer, who yourself have not been destroyed" (Is 33:1).

*The measure you give will be the measure you get...* Here he presents a reason in the likeness of a judgment. For a judge is, as is were, a living rule; for when you wish to weigh two things, you use a balance, and whatever is excessive in one you cut off. In the same way, if anyone has more than he ought of someone else's, let it be cut off and returned to each according to his due, i.e., according to that measure it will be measured to us.

But it is objected: Someone sins in time and is punished eternally. This does not seem to be a balanced judgment. I say that two things must be considered in a sin: the duration and the offense. In the offense are two things: turning away and turning to. On the part of turning to, the sin is finite; on the part of turning away, it is infinite, because one turns from God, who is infinite. When, therefore, one turns away from the infinite, he should be punished in an infinite way. Likewise, on the part of duration two things must be considered, namely, the act and the stain of sin. The act is momentary, but the stain infinite, i.e., eternal. Therefore, it should be punished in an infinite way, i.e., eternally. Hence, if the stain could be abandoned by the devils, they could be freed of sin and punishment. Similarly, on the part of punishment there is bitterness, which is finite; likewise, duration, which is finite.

(3) *Why do you see the speck in your brother's eye and do not see the log in your own eye?* Here he says that judgment should not be inordinate; for it is such, when it begins from someone, before the cause or its gravity have been fully investigated. For in judging, two things are necessary: knowledge of the cause, and judgment. Concerning the first, Job (29:16): "I searched out the cause which I did not know." *Why do you see the speck*, i.e., the slight sin, *in the eye*, i.e., in your brother's conscience, *but do not notice the log*, i.e., the grave sin, *in your own eye?* By log and speck he teaches us to consider the quantity of sins; for those who commit grave sins often reprehend those who commit slight ones, as happens in judging religious. When some who commit grave sins which they consider light, they consider them grave in religious; but they are absorbed as a drop of water in a cask of wine. Likewise, it happens that some sin slightly from weakness, and an evil, ill-affected judge, who would punish from hatred, considers the speck in their eye and not the log in his own.

(4) *How*, therefore, i.e., with what sincerity can you say: *Let me take the speck out of your eye*. You ought to blush. Chrysostom: "With what effort does a man love another more than himself?" For you correct him with the idea of correcting, you should first correct yourself; but this you do for hatred or vainglory. Therefore...

But one asks whether a person in mortal sin can correct another. I say that either he was in sin at one time or was not: if he was never in sin, he should fear lest he fall; therefore, he ought to correct reluctantly. If he has been in sin at some time, he ought to correct with gentleness. And therefore, the Lord perhaps permitted Peter to fall, because he would be the ruler of the Church and should deal meekly with sinners. And Paul says of Christ: "We have not a high priest who is unable to sympathize with sinners, but one who in every respect has been tempted, yet without sin" (Heb 4:15).

But if one lies under sin, it is either public or private: if private, it is either from weakness, because he is not pleased with sinning; and so he can correct another, because what he corrects in another he corrects in himself; or from malice, and then he should never correct. But if it is public, he should not scold severely, but meekly join himself to him. Hence sinners should not be severely reprimanded.

(5) He continues: *Hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye*. The Lord begins by arguing as below against the wicked servant. Augustine: "He shows that he intends to rebuke those who assume authority they do not have"; to the sinner God says: "Why do you recite my statutes or take my covenant on your lips? For you hate discipline" (Ps 50:16). *First take out* by fasting and prayer *the log from your own eye*, and then you will be able to see the speck in your brother's eye.

(6) He continues: *Give not to dogs what is holy*. In this statement he shows that judgment should be circumspect. Note, therefore, what is meant by "holy" and what by "pearls". Augustine: Holy things are to be kept inviolate and immaculate; precious pearls should not be held in low esteem." By dogs who tear with their teeth are signified heretics; by swine who trample under foot, the unclean. Therefore, to give holy things to dogs is to minister holy things to heretics. Likewise, if something spiritual is said and is scorned, it is given to swine. Or by holy things are meant the sacraments of the Church; by pearls the mysteries of truth. A dog is an animal totally unclean; swine are partly unclean, partly not. By dogs, unbelievers; by swine, wicked believers. *Do not give dogs what is holy*, i.e., the sacraments to unbelievers. Pearls, i.e., spiritual senses, should not be given to swine: "The animal man does not perceive the things that are of God" (1 Cor 2:14), i.e., lest perchance they scorn them: "He who is sated loathes honey" (Pr 27:7). Hence, *turning* to sin, *they attack you*, because they despise or resort to calumny. But why? Did not Christ say many good things to unbelievers, and they tore his words to pieces? I say that he did this for the sake of good men, who were with the wicked and who profited therefrom.

(7) *Ask and it will be given you*. He has given his doctrine, which is complete and perfect; here he teaches how it can be fulfilled. This requires two things: prayer and close attention. First, he teaches us to ask; secondly, he gives confidence of obtaining (v. 9). He says, therefore, *Ask*. And in this, observe two false opinions being removed: the first is that of the proud, who think they can fulfill the precepts by their own powers. But he says that it is necessary to ask God: "For what have you that you have not received?" (1 Cor 4:7). Secondly, he removes the opinion of many who say that God has no interest in prayers and that they would not obtain, if they asked; therefore, he says, *and you shall receive*. He also adds, *seek and you shall find*. This is explained, first, so that nothing is added by these two, but only the method is expressed. For solicitous attention is required in asking; also fervent devotion. He suggests these two when he says, *seek*, i.e., pray. Or, *seek*, as those who seek something put their whole intention there. Hence to him pertains what the spouse says in Song of Songs (3:2): "I sought him whom my soul loves." *And you shall find*: "One thing I asked of the Lord, that will I seek after" (Ps 27:4). Also *ask* after the manner of one knocking, because one who knocks at a door knocks harder, if he is not heard: "Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the fields, and lodge in the villages" (S of S 7:11). Secondly, according to Augustine, it is explained by referring to things Christ says of himself (Jn 14:6): "I am the way, the truth and the life." If you wish to go by this way, seek of him to direct your ways and say with the Psalmist (25:4): "Make me to know your ways, O Lord; teach me your paths." If you wish to know the truth, seek, and you shall find. But it is not enough to know the way and to seek the truth, unless you arrive at life, i.e., to enter it, knock. Hence Exodus (15:17): "You will bring them in and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance." But, according to the same, all those things are far better referred to the most importunate petition. Likewise, it is explained another way as referring to diverse acts: *ask*, for praying; *seek* by study; *knock* by acting.

(8) *For everyone who asks receives...* Someone will say: You say that we should ask. I believe that it is addressed to holy men, but I am not in that number. Therefore he says, *Everyone who asks receives*. But this is false, because it says in John (9:31): "We know that God does not hear sinners." Augustine answers that if God does not hear sinners, how was it said of the publican that he said (Lk 18:13): "Lord, be merciful to me, a sinner." Hence he adds: "He does not hear sinners, i.e., who willingly remain in sin." But it should be noted that prayer is meritorious and effective and can be meritorious, even if it is not effective.

But how can he say that *everyone who asks receives* ? It seems false, because what is asked is not always received. I answer that in four cases man asks and is not heard:

first, because he asks for something not advantageous: "You do not know what you are asking" (Mt 20:22); therefore, things necessary for salvation should be requested.
Secondly, because he does not ask aright: "You do not receive, because you ask wrongly" (Jas 4:3). Therefore, one should ask piously, i.e., with faith; and humbly: "He has regarded the humility of his handmaid" (Lk 1:48).
Thirdly, sometimes one is not heard, when he prays for someone whose merits are an obstacle: "If Moses and Aaron were to sand before me, my soul is not in favor of that people" (Jer 15:1). Again, he is not heard sometimes, because he does not persevere: "It is necessary to pray always" (Lk 18:1) and perseveringly, because the Lord wants desires to grow.
Fourthly, it happens that the Lord hears but does not seem to, because he gives for our benefit, not according to our wishes, as happened to Paul. Augustine: "'The good Lord, who often does not grant what we ask, in order to grant what we should prefer; and because we call him Father, he grants us what a father would give his son."

(9) Therefore he adds: *What man of you, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone?* By bread is understood Christ: "I am the living bread which came down from heaven:" (Jn 6:51). It is also sacred doctrine: "I will feed him with the bread of life and understanding" (Sir 15:3); and it is charity: "The produce of the ground will be rich and plenteous" (Is 30:23). ON the other hand, the stone is the devil: "His heart will be hardened as a stone" (Jb 41:15). It is also obstinacy: "I will take from you the stony heart, and I will give you a heart of flesh" (Ez 36:26). It is also false doctrine: "Men put an end to darkness and search to the farthest bound" (Jb 28:3). Hence, if someone asks of "God as a Father for bread, i.e., Christ, he will not be given the devil.

(10) Similarly, *if a fish*. The fish lives in water and signifies understanding of dogmas: "He that drinks of this water will not thirst again" (Jn 4:13); and in v. 14: "It will be a fountain of water springing up into life everlasting." Again, by water, tribulations; hence, by fish, those living in the waters of tribulation. Or fish refers to faith, which is hidden under the water, i.e., the guardianship of the spirit; but the false doctrine of heretics, by the serpent.

(11) He concludes: *If you, then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father, who is in heaven, give good things to those who ask him?* But someone will say: He said this to the apostles, who were not evil. Chrysostom answers: "Because they were being compared to the divine goodness." "All our righteousness is as a filthy rag" (Is 64:6). Jerome says: "And if not all are actually evil, yet all are evil as to proneness to evil." Hence it says in Genesis (6:5): "All the thoughts of the human heart are intent upon evil at all times"; "For, behold, each one walks according to the depravity of his heart" (Jer 16:12). Augustine: " *If you, then, who are evil*. He does not say, 'you are evil,' but *although you are evil*, you give your children temporal goods, which you regard as good; much more then, your Father, who is supremely good." And this is what follows: *How much more will your Father, who is in heaven, give good things to those who ask him*, if you want to receive.

(12) *So, whatever you wish that men would do to you, do so to them*, i.e., forgive others, if you would be forgiven. Some have added, *all goods*, but it is not needed, because he says, *you wish*. Wishing, or better, willing, deals with good things; cupidity with evil. Therefore, it is not necessary to add *goods*. Therefore, what you wish done to you, do to others. *For this is the Law and the prophets*. He does not say, "the whole Law and the prophets," as in the first precept; "On those tow depend the whole law and the prophets" (Mt 22:40).

(13) *Enter by the narrow gate*. Lest anyone conclude from the saying, *ask and you shall receive*, that man has everything from God without good works, he teaches that this, too, comes by good works. First, therefore, he presents the admonition; secondly the reason (v. 13b). He says, therefore, *Enter*, i.e., try to enter. Augustine explains this in two ways: Christ is the gate: "I am the door" (Jn 10:9). This gate is narrow through humility, because he humbled himself unto death. Hence (Is 10:2): "The Lord will make a brief word upon the earth." Therefore, *Enter by the narrow gate*, i.e., by the humility of Christ: "for it was fitting for Christ to die and so enter into his glory" (Lk 24:26). Hence through many tribulations one must enter the kingdom of God. Secondly, this gate is called charity: "This is the gate of the Lord; the righteous shall enter through it" (Ps 118:20). This is made narrow by the divine law, and we must enter through it by observing the law and the precepts.

Then he assigns the reason: *for the gate is wide and the way is easy that leads to destruction*. He describes two gates: one is wide, the other narrow. The wide is described, because the devil is wide and the presumption of pride is wide: "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it" (Mt 16:18). This gate is wide, because something wide receives all; for it is not such that it can be filled. This gate is also called sin or vice; and this is wide, because it can occur in many ways. For virtue exists in one way, but vice in many: "There is swearing, lying, killing, stealing, and committing adultery" (Hos 4:2). Again, it is a wide way, and this is the working of sin: "What do you gain by going to Egypt?" (Jer 2:18). Furthermore, this way is spacious, because in its beginning it seems wide; but later it is narrowed, for its terminus leads to perdition, because "the wages of sin is death" (Rom 6:23). *And those who enter by it are many*. Here he mentions the number, because literally "the number of fools is infinite" (Ec 1:15).

(14) *For the gate is narrow and the way is hard, that leads to life*. This is contrary to the preceding. It is narrow, because it is restricted by the rule of the Law, and it is a way contrary to the other way: "For the ways on your right the Lord knows, but the ones on your left are perverse" (Pr 4;27).

But one might ask why the way of charity is narrow, for it seems to be wide: "I have led you in the paths of uprightness. When you walk, your step will not be hampered: and if you run, you will not stumble" (Pr 4:11). But the way of sinners is narrow; hence "We have walked difficult ways" (Wis 7:5). I answer that there is a way of the flesh and of reason. The way of charity in the way of the flesh is narrow; in the way of reason, it is not. And an example of a teacher can be cited: the more he loves a child, the more he restricts his steps. Hence, the ways of charity in the way of the flesh are confined, but not in the way of reason: "Tame my flesh with your fear" (Ps 119:120).

*And those who find it are few*. Here he mentions how difficult and rare it is to find the road of the spirit, but the flesh, not. And there is a reason: for the way of the flesh is pleasure, and this is at hand; but the way of the spirit is hidden. Hence Ps 31 (v. 19): "How abundant is your goodness, which you laid up for those who fear you." Few find it, because it is in concealment. But some do find it, and then abandon it: "No one, putting his hand to the plow and looking back is worthy of the kingdom of God" (Lk 9:62).


## 7—2

Mt 7:15-29


> 15. Beware of false prophets, who come to you in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. 16. By their fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? 17. Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and the evil tree bringeth forth evil fruit. 18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil tree bring forth good fruit. 19. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be cut down, and shall be cast into the fire. 20. Wherefore by their fruits you shall know them. 21. Not every one that saith to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that doth the will of my Father who is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. 22. Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and cast out devils in thy name, and done many miracles in thy name? 23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, you that work iniquity. 24. Every one therefore that heareth these my words, and doth them, shall be likened to a wise man that built his house upon a rock, 25. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and they beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded on a rock. 26. And every one that heareth these my words and doth them not, shall be like a foolish man that built his house upon the sand, 27. And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and they beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall thereof. 28. And it came to pass when Jesus had fully ended these words, the people were in admiration at his doctrine. 29. For he was teaching them as one having power, and not as the scribes and Pharisees.

(15) *Beware of false prophets*. He teaches them to be wary of certain ones whom they should avoid. They are described from their profession, namely, prophets. But one might ask of which prophets, because the Law and the prophets last until John; hence in that time there were no prophets concerning Christ, because they ended in him. Therefore, it must be said that prophets are teachers in the Church and prelates. But what does he mean by *false* ? The false prophets are those not sent. Abut these Jeremiah (23:21): "I did not send them and they ran." Likewise, false prophets are the ones who lie; hence, Jeremiah (2:8): "His prophets have prophesied by Baal." So, too, there were many pseudo-prophets among the people, just as among us there will be lying teachers.

*Beware*, i.e., take care to avoid, because they are concealed; and one must beware of hidden snares. Hence their contagion hides within. He says, therefore, *who come to you in sheep's clothing*. The sheep are the faithful: "We are his sheep and the sheep of his pasture" (Ps 100:3). Their clothing are fasts and almsgiving, with which they cover themselves: "Having the appearance of piety, but denying its power" (2 Tim 3:5). But note that if wolves clothe themselves with the pelts of sheep, the sheep does not lose his pelt for this purpose; similarly, although those evil ones are covered with good works, the good make much progress. *But inwardly are ravenous wolves*. This is explained especially of heretics, and secondarily of evil prelates. Hence, a comment on John (10:11): "I am the good shepherd," says: "It is said that the shepherd is one who governs and rules; the wolf, who intends harm; the mercenary, who seeks his own convenience. Hence, the shepherd should be loved, the wolf fled from, and the mercenary tolerated." Therefore, *inwardly they are ravenous wolves* is understood of those who intend to pervert the people, and they deserve to be called wolves. Also, mercenaries, namely, evil Christians who scatter the flock by bad example, who lead a wicked life; although in the effect of their conduct they imitate wolves: "because after my departure ravenous wolves will enter among you, not sparing the flock" (Acts 20:29). And he says, *within*, because they have the evil intention of killing the people.

(16) *You will know them by their fruits*, i.e., actions. But it seems to be the opposite, because they have sheep's clothing, and clothing is works. Therefore, they will be known from them. Chrysostom: "Fruit is the confession of faith." Hence, if they confess the faith, they are not heretics: "For the fruit of the light is in all goodness and justice and truth" (Eph 5:9). But if it is taken for pretenders, then it is explained so that by clothing is meant external works: "But the fruit of the spirit is charity, joy and peace" (Gal 5:22). But you will ask: How can they be recognized? The answer is that scarcely any hypocrite can be so clever, that no evil in word or act will appear: "As in water face answers face, so the hearts of men are reflected to the prudent" (Pr 27:19). Seneca: "No one can long bear a fake personality." Indeed, they are especially revealed in two ways: in things that suddenly occur to be done, because in matters done after deliberation one is cautious. Also in troubles: "There is a friend who is such at his own convenience, but will not stand by you on the day of trouble" (Sir 6:8). They are also revealed when they cannot do what they want or when they have already obtained it. Hence dominion shows the man.

*Are grapes gathered from thorns?* By grapes, from which wine is made, is understood spiritual joy, because "wine gladdens the hear of man" (Ps 104:15); by figs, the sweetness of ecclesial peace, which is charity. This cannot be produced from thistles, i.e., sinners, because "thorns and thistles it shall bring forth to you" (Gen 3:18).

(17) He proves this with an example: *Every sound tree bears good fruit, but the bad tree bears evil fruit*. From this the Manicheans assumed two natures, namely, good and evil. But this is not true, because we see good fruit formed from an evil creation, and vice versa. Hence from this you should understand that the tree is the principle of the fruit. But there are two principles: that of nature and that of conduct. The principle from nature is the soul, and whatever comes from it naturally is good. But the principle of conduct is the will. Therefore, if the will is good, the work is good, since it has a good will with a good intention; because if one wills to steal for almsgiving, even though the will is good, the intention is not right.

(19) But what will happen to the bad tree? *Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down*, because if it does not bear or if it omits doing what it can, it will be cut down: "If anyone does not abide in me, he will be cast out, and they will gather him up and throw him into the fire, and he will burn" (Jn 15:6). Hence in Luke (8:7) it is said of the fig tree which the Lord commanded to be cut down and taken away: "Take away the wicked one, lest it see God's glory"

(20) He concludes: *Thus you will know them by their fruits*.

(21) *Not everyone who says to me, 'Lord, Lord'...* Having presented the doctrine, he shows that it must be observed, because nothing else suffices for salvation In regard to God's commands or doctrine four things are required or praiseworthy: that we confess them with our mouth, that they be confirmed by miracles, that God's word be heard and performed in action. Concerning the first: "Man believes with his heart and he confesses with his lips" (Rom 10:10). Concerning the second: "The Lord worked with them and confirmed the message by the signs that attended it" (Mk 16:20). Concerning the third: "He that is of God hears the word of God" (Jn 8:47). Fourthly, it is required that he do: "Be doers of the word, and not hearers only" (Jas 1:22). Hence he wishes to show that three without the fourth do not profit; hence he says, *not everyone who says to me 'Lord, Lord''...*

But this seems contrary to the Apostle: "No one can say, 'Lord Jesus' except in the Holy Spirit" (1 Cor 12:3). But whoever has the Holy Spirit enters the kingdom of heaven. Augustine answers that "to say" has a number of meanings: general, and strict and proper. Strictly, it is nothing less than to manifest affection and will. In this way the Apostle says: "No one can say 'Lord Jesus' except in the Holy Spirit." And this is no more than to believe and obey the Lord. Likewise, commonly, i.e., to proclaim with the lips in any way whatever. Concerning this, Is (29:13): "This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me." Or, in this way: *Not everyone who says to me 'Lord, Lord.'* He says the word *Lord* twice to signify that confession is twofold, namely, of the voice and of praise, neither of which is enough.

Who then will enter? Not one who says "Lord, Lord," *but he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven*. "No one ascends into heaven, except he that came down from heaven" (Jn 3:13), Hence no one can ascend, unless he descends like Christ, of whom John (6:38): "I have come down from heaven not to do my own will but the will of him who sent me." Hence it is necessary to do God's will: "This is the will of god, your sanctification" (1 Th 4:3). Hence David said: "Teach me to do your will" (Ps 143:10). And as the Lord taught us to pray: "Your will be done." But it should be note that by saying, *kingdom*, he touches on the eternal reward; hence he says, *will enter*. For that kingdom consists in spiritual goods, not in external goods; therefore, he says, *will enter*. Consequently, Song of Songs (1:4) says: "The king has brought me into his chamber." Likewise, he says, *of heaven*, because although someone here may have riches or honors, all this is for the sake of that. Hence the reward will consist in lofty things.

(22) But someone could say that it is enough for salvation to work miracles. He excludes that, because *On that day many will say to me, 'Lord, Lord, did we not prophecy in your name...?* He says, *many*, to signify those who secede from unity, because they are included under a multitude, for "the number of fools is infinite" (Ec 1:15). Likewise, he introduces this to stress what he had said, namely, that *every tree that does not bear fruit will be cut down*. But he had not said by whom; therefore, he said, *to me*, appointed as judge, because "the Father has given all judgment to the Son" (Jn 5:22). Likewise, he says, *on that day*. Day names a terminus, but not according to the quality of time, because the day of judgment is sometimes called night. But sometimes it is called day and sometimes night, because it is not certain when it will come. Hence below (25:6): "At midnight there was a cry, 'Behold the bridegroom! Come and meet him'." The Apostle calls it day in 1 Cor (4:3); and in Ps 37 (v. 6): "He will bring forth my vindication as the light, and my judgment as the noonday." *'Lord, Lord.'* He repeats it to signify greater confusion and fear: "They will be disturbed with a horrible fear" (Wis 5:2). *Did we not cast out demons in your name?* This is a supernatural power: "No power on earth can be compared to this," namely, the devil's power (Jb 41:24).

But one asks: How do those who cast out devils become rejected? Chrysostom answers that they lie. Another answer is that at one time they were good and worked miracles; later, they became evil. But this cannot stand, because the Lord said, (23) *I never knew you*. In another way, it must be said that they say, *in your name*, not in the name of the Holy Spirit. For some act in the name of the Holy Spirit, and some not; as it says in Jeremiah (2:8) that some prophesied in the name of Baal. Some, too, by the arts of magic.

But it may be asked how demons work miracles. I say that they cannot; but they do things that seem to be miracles, although they are not miracles. Miracles are things whose effect is obvious, but the cause is latent. Hence, something that seems marvelous to the ignorant is not so among the wise; for example, and eclipse. Hence, since demons have a truer understanding of natural things, they can do things that seem miraculous to us. In another way, according to Jerome: Among the gifts of the Holy Spirit some are graces gratuitously given, but charity alone distinguishes between the sons of God and sons of the devil: "To each is given the manifestation of the Holy Spirit for the common good" (1 Cor 12:7), or for the growth of his holiness or of the Church, that the faith they preach may be manifested. And thus, even prelates leading a wicked life can work miracles.

[ *Andthen I will declare to them that I do not know you*, that is, I do not approve of you, even when you have worked miracles; II Timothy 2:19: *The Lord knows who belong to him.* ]

(24) *Everyone who hears these words...* He shows that without works nothing profits, not even listening to the word of God; because hearing is ordained to faith: "Faith comes by hearing" (Rom 10:17). For hearing is not enough. He manifests this in two ways, because he indicates the lot of one who hears and does, and of one who hears without doing.

First, he does three things: first, he mentions the building; secondly, the assault (v. 25); thirdly, its sturdiness (v. 25b).

He says, therefore, that hearing is not enough, although it is necessary: "He that is of God hears the words of God" (Jn 8:49); "not the hearers of the word, but doers, will be justified" (Rom 2:13). Likewise, he says well, *these my words*; because whatever pertains to salvation is contained there. Hence *he who hears these my words and does them will be like a wise man...* He does not say that he is wise but will be like a wise man. And this simile can be understood of a material building, and then the text is clear; or it can be understood spiritually, and then the man is Christ: "I have found one man in a thousand" (Ec 7:29). Christ's building is the Church, for he knows how it should be built. Hence, it says of him in Proverbs (9:1): "Wisdom built itself a house"; and Proverbs (14:1): "The wise woman built her house." *Upon a rock*: "The rock was Christ" (1 Cor 10:1). Hence Christ built on himself, for he is the foundation: "No one can lay any foundation except that which has been laid, which is Christ Jesus" (1 Cor 3:11). For this is the foundation of eternal truth, which is absolutely unchangeable: "Those who trust in the Lord are like mount Zion" (Ps 125:1).

(25) The assault on this house follows: *And the rain came*. Rain is taken as doctrine, so that there is good rain and bad rain. Therefore, what collapses is bad doctrine: "The Lord rained sulphur and fire on Sodom" (Gen 19:24). Likewise, floods are good and not good: "The floods divided their land" (Is 18:2); and by this the wise, who regard themselves as wise, are signified. Those floods are produced by rains. By winds are signified the devils; hence in Jude (v. 12): "Waterless clouds, carried along by winds." *They beat on that house*, i.e., the Church, *and it did not fall*: "Its cords will never be broken" (Is 33:21). And why? *Because it had been founded upon the rock*, i.e., Christ.

Then he presents the simile indicating the outcome of one who hears and does not do. In regard to this he mentions the construction; secondly, the assault (v. 27); thirdly, the ruin (v. 27b).

(26) He says: *and everyone who hears these my words and does not do them, will be like a foolish man*, who fell from the light of wisdom. Hence Ec (4:13): "Better is a wise servant than a foolish king." Likewise, the fool is the devil; the house he builds is the assembly of unbelievers. Hence Ps 73 (v. 30): "The earth is filled with houses of sin." *The house is built on sand*. By sand is meant unbelievers, who are unfruitful. And they are numerous: "The number of fools is infinite" (Ec 1:15). Again, sand does not cohere; similarly, they are always at odds. He builds on sand, i.e., makes as his end, which is as a foundation, a temporal good.

(27) *The rain came*, i.e., good doctrine, *the floods came*, i.e., sacred teachers, *the winds blew*, i.e., angels: "Who makes spirits his angels" (Ps 104:4). *And they beat against that house, and it fell*: "Babylon has fallen, has fallen: (Rev 14:8), namely, through preaching. *And great was the fall thereof*. If we wish to adapt the simile, we must say that a man should build like Christ. The Apostle teaches this: "Let each man take care how he builds upon it" (1 Cor 3:10). For someone builds a dwelling-place for God; some do the opposite, as below and as in 1 Corinthians (3:7), some build on straw. For a foundation is that upon which someone bases his intention. For some hear to learn, and these build on the intellect; and this is building on straw. Hence James (1:23): "One who hears and does not do is like a man who looks at his natural face in a mirror." Hence they build on the changeable. But another hears in order to do and love; and he builds on a rock, because it is on something firm and stable: "Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it" (Ec 22:6). For that foundation is laid on charity: "Who will separate us from the love of Christ?" (Rom 8:35).

But one might ask why a foundation on the intellect is unstable and not solid, but that on the affections is. The reason is that the intellect deals with universals, for it cannot know much except in a general way. 'Therefore, stability is not based on wandering about the universal. But actions and affections deal with particulars and good habits; consequently, if temptation comes, it clings to what it is accustomed to, namely, good action; and so it resists.

But what is understood by rain? The answer is the devil never tempts first in important matters, but first in lesser and then goes on to the greater; hence by rain, evil thoughts. He tempts, therefore, to evil thoughts; and if there is consent, he then tempts to something graver, and thus they increase. From these come floods, and then he rushes in with all his powers, so that the victim necessarily falls: "He who despises small things will fail little by little" (Sir 19:1). Or, in this way: *rain*, temptations of the flesh; *floods*, temptations of the world; *winds*, temptations of the devil. Or, according to Augustine, rain is superstitious doctrine. When one adheres to these, he falls most gravely; and this is the great ruin. But it is not great, when he hesitates and does not fall, because when the temptation occurs, he fears and grieves. But some give in completely: "Raze it, raze it! Down to its foundation" (Ps 137:7). Or it is called *a great rain*, because the heart is impenitent: "They spend their days in prosperity, and in peace they go down to Sheol" (Job 21:13).

(28) *And when Jesus finished these words, the crowds were astonished*. There were three types of men who followed the Lord Jesus: some were astonished and scandalized, as the Pharisees, about whom below (c. 15). Some were astonished, but not scandalized, as the crowds. But some, as the perfect, were not astonished. But we must inquire about his saying, *the crowds*, because there were no crowds there. It can be said that the sermon was made to the crowds and to the disciples, but in the mountain below its summit was a plain. The disciples, therefore, were on the summit with Christ; but the crowds in the plain. Or, it can be said that it was given first to the apostles and then to the crowds. Or, crowds of disciples followed him.

But what was the reason for the astonishment? Because *he taught them as one having authority*. Hence in him is fulfilled Ec (8:4): "His speech is full of power." Therefore, *as having authority [power]*, because he spoke as a lord or as a lawgiver. Or, *as having power*, i.e., with the ability to penetrate the heart: "Lo, he sends forth his voice, his mighty voice" (Ps 68:33). Or, with the power to work miracles, because he confirmed what he said with miracles.

Augustine says that everything preached in this sermon should be reduced to the seven gifts and to the beatitudes, because the first thing said, *you shall not kill*, pertains to the gift of fear and to the beatitude of piety. Then what follows, *make friends with your adversary*, pertains to the gift of piety, through which meekness is fulfilled. *You shall not commit adultery...* pertains to the gift of knowledge, by which the beatitude of mourning is fulfilled. The one concerning endurance pertains to the gift of courage, by which it is fulfilled, and to the beatitude, *blessed are those who hunger and thirst after justice*. The part which says, *love your enemies*, pertains to the gift of counsel, by which the beatitude of mercy is fulfilled. But by the part which follows in c. 6 about not being anxious, up to c. 7, *enter by the narrow gate*, he intends to cleanse the heart; hence it pertains to the gift of understanding and to the beatitude which is cleanness of heart; hence *blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God*. The rest that follows pertains to the gift of wisdom.
