# Chapter 11

> 1. And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve disciples, he passed from thence, to teach and to preach in their cities. 2. Now when John had heard in prison the works of Christ: sending two of his disciples he said to him: 3. Art thou he that art to come, or look we for another? 4. And Jesus making answer said to them: Go and relate to John what you have heard and seen. 5. The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, the poor have the gospel preached to them. 6. And blessed is he that shall not be scandalized in me. 7. And when they went their way, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John: What went you out into the desert to see? a reed shaken with the wind? 8. But what went you out to see? a man clothed in soft garments? Behold they that are clothed in soft garments, are in the houses of kings. 9. But what went you out to see? A prophet? Yea I tell you, and more than a prophet. 10. For this is he of whom it is written: Behold I send my angel before my face, who shall prepare thy way before thee. 11. Amen I say to you, there hath not risen among them that are born of women a greater than John the Baptist: yet he that is the lesser in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. 12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent bear it away. 13. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John: 14. And if you will receive it, he is Elias that is to come. 15. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

(1)After these words the Lord went on from there to teach and preach; and this for three reasons.

One reason was to show by example what he had taught: "Jesus began to do and to teach" (Acts 1:1).
Secondly, to show that even the wicked should be preached to: "I am a debtor to the wise and unwise" (Rom 1:14).
Thirdly, to give others the opportunity to preach: "If a revelation is made to another sitting by, let the first be silent" (1 Cor 14:30).

(2) *Now when John heard in prison about the works of Christ*. The teaching of Christ has been mentioned and confirmed; the preachers have been instructed. Now the rebellious are clamed: first, he sets John's disciples at rest; secondly, the scribes (c. 14).

In regard to the first he does three things: first, he quiets the doubters; secondly, he rebukes the crowds (v. 16); thirdly, he gives thanks for the apostles' faith (v. 25).

In regard to the first a question is asked; secondly, the answer (v. 4).

He says, therefore: *When he heard in prison about the works of Christ*. This was the occasion for sending them. The same is presented in Luke (5:18) but in a different order. He says, therefore, that he was in prison as above (c. 4). Then Jesus began to work miracles. And this was fitting, that the sun not appear, while clouds were present: "The law and the prophets until John" (Mt 11:13). *The works*, i.e., the miracles, *of Christ, he sent two of his disciples to say to him*. Some try to condemn John for this, because he wondered whether he was the Christ, and it is obvious that one in doubt about the faith is an unbeliever.

Ambrose on Luke says that this was not a question proceeding from unbelief but from piety; for he is not speaking about his coming into the world but of his coming to the Passion. Hence he wonders if he had come to suffer, as Peter said. "This will never happen to you" (Mt 16:22). On the other hand, Chrysostom says that John already knew from the beginning, when he said: "behold the Lamb of God" (Jn 1:28). It is clear, therefore, that he knew him to be a victim to be sacrificed. Hence he is commended here for being more than a prophet; but prophets knew future events. Gregory gives another reason, namely, that it is not a question about coming into the world or to the Passion but about descending into hell; because John was close to the time for going to hell, he wanted to be made certain. *Are you he who is to come?* But Chrysostom objects to this. For those who are in hell it is a state of punishment; hence it seems that he would have asked this without reason. But this is not contrary to Gregory, because he did not wish to announce conversion to the captives, but to the just, that they might rejoice. Another reason is that the Lord often puts questions, not because he was not sure, but to remove calumny, as in John (11:34) he asked about Lazarus: "Where have you placed him?" not because he did not know, but so those who shoed him the tomb could not deny or calumniate. Therefore, it was the same with John. Because his disciples were suspicious of Christ, he sent them, not because he was in doubt, but in order that they not suspect but confess him. But why did he not send them before? Because he was always with them before and assured them; but since he wanted to depart from them, he wanted them to be made certain about Christ.

(3) He says, therefore, *Are you he who is to come, or look we for another?* It is true that our fathers awaited you, as it says in Exodus (c. 4).

(4) *And Jesus answered them*. Here Christ's answer is given. John and many disciples, as John says (c. 4). Therefore, there was a dispute among them, because they saw Christ's works and preferred him to John. But seeing John's abstinence, they prefer him to Christ. Hence, first he proposes the question; secondly, he commends John (v. 10).

In regard to the first he answers in terms of his coming and Passion. The time will come, when God will suffer and many will be scandalized, because "to the Jews a scandal" (1 Cor 1:23). Hence he answers when this will be. According to Chrysostom he wants to show that he whom the prophets had foretold has come. Hence three things were promised by the prophets: sometimes the coming of God, by some the coming of a new teacher, by some the coming of sanctification and redemption. How shall we say then that he will come? And he answers in the same way Isaiah (35:4) answers: "Behold God will come and save us." Hence you will see those miracles. *Go and tell John what you hear* in the teachings *and see* in the miracles. Again, a teacher was promised: "Be glad, O sons of Zion..., because he has given you a teacher of justice" (Jl 2:22).

(5) *The blind see...*, and this literally. Then if you ask when he will come: "The spirit of the Lord is upon me; he has sent me to preach to he meek" (Is 61:1), and this is signified when he says *the poor have the Gospel preached to them*, i.e., poverty will be blessed. Hence above (5:3); "Blessed are the poor in spirit..." and Luke (4:18): "The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor." Again, someone holy will come to sanctify sinners; hence Isaiah (8:13): "The Lord of hosts, him you shall regard as holy."

(6) Hence to some was promised sanctification, and after they were sanctified, others would be scandalized; therefore, he says, *Blessed is he who is not scandalized in me*. Hence it says, "So Jesus also suffered outside the gate, in order to sanctify the people through his own blood" (Heb 13:12). Therefore, he shows the sings of his coming. But if we speak in the moral sense, the entire process of man's sanctification is signified. For the sinner first suffers blindness, when the reason is darkened: "Like the untimely birth that never sees the sun" (Ps 58:8); "Bring forth the people who are blind but have eyes" (Is 43:8). He is said to be lame, when the mind is drawn to various things, as it says in 1 Kings (18:21): "How long will you go limping with two different opinions?" Likewise, he becomes ulcerous in treachery and leprous, because then he cannot be recalled and infects others. After that he becomes deaf, because chastening is not heard. Then he dies: "Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead" (Eph 5:14). All these the Lord heals. The last are the poor in spirit, so that no health remains in them: "My loins are filled with burning, and there is not health in my flesh" (Ps 38:7). These, too, the Lord heals and they rise to a certain mental soundness, in which is true peace: "Great peace have those who love your law; nothing can make them stumble" (Ps 119:165).

(7) *As they went away*. Here he satisfies the crowd's doubts. Although the crowds had heard John's witness to Christ, they now seemed to hesitate. For they could have three things in their heart, because a person changes his mind for three reasons: either on account of fickleness of mind, or for the sake of some profit, or on account of the human spirit's passing form ignorance of the truth to knowing it: "For God knows that the thoughts of men are vain" (Ps 94:11). therefore, he first excludes fickleness from them; secondly, the desire for profit (v. 8); thirdly, he shows that he has prophetic truth (v. 9).

He says, therefore, *As they went away*. The Lord teaches us with remarkable tact, as he never wished to praise John in the presence of his disciples or anyone in his own presence: "Let another praise you and not your own mouth; a stranger and not your own lips" (Pr 27:2). Because if the one praised is good, he is embarrassed; if he is evil, he is flattered. *Jesus began to preach to the crowds: "What did you go out into the desert to see?* Did you go to see *a reed* ? No, but you went out to see a resolute man. For a reed is easily moved; hence a mind that changes quickly is regarded as a wind: "So that we may no longer be children, tossed to and fro with every wind" (Eph 4:14).

(8) Likewise, he is not inconstant as seeking profit. *Why then did you go out?* For all riches pertain to some bodily use, such as food or clothing. And it is evident that neither of these had any influence. Therefore, there is no reason to believe that he says this for any advantage: *Why then did you go out? To see a man clothed in soft raiment?* But why does he make no mention of food? Because there was no question on that point. But he was clothed in camel's hair. Hence *those who wear soft raiment* are not in the desert but *in kings' houses*. Chrysostom explains it another way: Some are lightheaded by nature, others from pleasure, as Hosea (4:11) says: "Fornication and wine and intoxication take away understanding." He removes the first by what he said above; the second, when he says, *wear soft garments*; therefore, he is not inconstant from the pleasures of life.

But here a question can be raised about being clothed in pleasures: Is it a sin? If not, it should not have been charged against that rich man, who dressed in purple and fine linen every day (Lk 16:19). Augustine says that such things are not to be considered, but the intention of the user; for one should be dressed after the custom of those among whom he lives. Therefore, the custom needs further clarification. Hence some dress more sparingly, some more ornately; and both ways require a distinction. If more sparingly, then it is either for a good intention, and this is good, or is for vainglory, and this is evil. If more ornately, it is on account of pride, and this is evil; or for a symbol, as a bishop or priest, and this is good. Mystically, by men who wear soft garments are signified flatterers; for he is dressed in soft garments who is mollified by complimentary words, as proud men seek glory from words: "If a ruler listens to the words of a lie, all his officials will be wicked" (Pr 29:12).

(9) But they might say: He is inconstant and speaks from a human spirit; therefore, he removes this: *But what did you go out to see? A prophet?* Hence he bears witness that he did not speak from a spirit that was human but prophetic. So he shows that he is a prophet and more than a prophet. For he was a prophet, as it says in Luke (1:76): "And you, child, shall be called a prophet of the Most High." Likewise, he raised him above the prophets, saying, *I tell you, and more than a prophet*. He said this for three reasons:

first, because the office of a prophet is to foretell the future; but he manifested not only the future but also things present, saying: "Behold the Lamb of God, behold him who takes away the sin of the world" (Jn 1:29).
Secondly, he is not only called a prophet but the Baptizer, as above (c. 3); and the precursor, as in Luke (1:76): "You will go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways."
Thirdly, as to his manner: for he acted more miraculously than a prophet, because he prophesied from his mother's womb; the others did not, as it says in Luke (1:44): "For behold, when the voice of your greeting sounded on my ears, the infant in my womb leapt for joy."

(10) *This is he of whom it is written*. Here he proves John's excellence: first, by a text; secondly, from his special privileges (v. 11). He says, therefore: I have said that he is more than a prophet, concerning whom Malachi (3:1) speaks: *Behold, I sent my messenger [angel], who shall prepare your way before you...* In this text John's outstanding qualities are mentioned: first, because he calls him an angel. For an angel is higher than a prophet, because as a priest is midway between a prophet and the people, so a prophet between angels and priests. But the angel is between God and prophets; hence Zechariah (1:9) says: "The angel who spoke in me." Angel is the name of an office, not of a nature; hence John is called an angel from his office. For there is a difference between an angel and a prophet, because the angels see openly; hence it says below (18:10): "I say to you, that their angels always behold the face of my Father in heaven." Angels always see God's face, but the prophets do not. Hence, as angels always see the face of the Father, so John saw Christ in a special way; and because it was a special way, he says *my*. He also says, *before my face*. When a king goes somewhere, many people precede him; but the more familiar ones go before his face. So John is considered more honorable, because he was sent before his face; for the nearer one is, the more honorable he is. Finally, he prepared the way, because he baptized; hence, he says, *who shall prepare your way before you*.

(11) *Amen, I say to you*. Above the Lord commended john on the authority of a prophet [Malachi]; now he intends to commend him in his own words and explains the prophet's text. He does three things: first, he commends him as to the difference of every order and state; secondly, as to the difference between the Law and the Gospel (v. 12); thirdly, as to the difference between the present age and the future (v. 14).

First, he shows that he is outstanding among those on earth; secondly, he shows him lesser among the angels (v. 11b).

He says, therefore: it has been stated that John is an angel, and to put it briefly, *I say to you, among those born of women there has arisen no one greater than John the Baptist. He was speaking in a proper sense, when he said, has arisen*, because all are born children of wrath (Eph 2:3). Therefore, whoever can attain to the state of grace arises. Hence *among those born of women*. And he speaks precisely, in order that Christ be excluded from this generality, because "woman" suggest defilement, but "female", sex. Hence if son of woman is found anywhere, as in John (19:26): "Woman, behold your son," in that case it denotes sex, not defilement. But how can he say, *among those born of women there has arisen no one greater* ? Is he for this reason greater than all? Jerome says that it does not follow: If a greater has not arisen, therefore he is greater. But Chrysostom says that he is greater than all. Therefore, according to the first explanation, I say that the argument would be valid among angels, where there is order, i.e., that the one than whom none is greater is the greatest; but among men it is not true, because among men there is no order according to nature but only according to grace. Again, if he is said to be greater than all the patriarchs of the Old Testament, it is not incongruous, because he is greater and more outstanding who has been called to a greater office. For Abraham is great among the patriarchs by reason of his faith; but Moses as to the office of prophet, as it says in Deuteronomy (34;10): "There has not arisen a prophet since in Israel like Moses." They had all been the Lord's precursors, but none was as great or more favored. Therefore he was raised to a greater office: "He will be great before the Lord" (Lk 1:15).

*Yet he who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he*. Taking their stand from these words, some have found occasion for calumny; for they want to damn all the fathers of the Old Testament. For if he is greater than the others, it follows that the others are not among those to be saved, because by the kingdom of heaven the present Church is designated. Therefore, if John was not a member of the present Church, he was not among the number of the elect; nor, consequently, were the others.

But this opinion is erroneous, because it is evident that what the Lord says is in praise of John. However, this expression can be explained in three ways: first, so that by kingdom of heaven the order of the blessed is understood and whoever is least among them is greater than one on the way. Therefore the Lord calls the present state a childhood: "When I became a man, I put away the things of a child" (1 Cor 13:11); hence those on the way are called children. And this is true, if one is speaking of the actually greater; for one who has attained is actually greater. But it is otherwise with the virtually greater: for one small herb may be greater in efficacy but smaller in size than others.

It is explained in another way so that the present Church is designated by the kingdom of heaven. Then the lesser is not taken universally but in relation to time: "He that comes after me was made before me" (Jn 1:15). Hence, he that is lesser is greater than he.

It can also be explained a third way. For someone is called greater in two ways: either as to merit, and thus many patriarchs are greater than certain persons in the New Testament, as Augustine says that John's celibacy is not preferred to Abraham's marriage; or by comparing one state to another, as virgins outrank the married, although not every virgin is better than each married person. Hence John's greatness lies on a boundary, because he is greater than wayfarers but less than those who have attained, so that he holds a middle place.

(12) *From the days of John the Baptist until now*... Here he is commended on the basis of the distinction between the Old Testament and the New Testament, so that John's excellence is marked by the fact that he is the beginning of the New Testament and the end of the Old Testament. Thus he said: "He that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he," which refers to the fact that he is the beginning of the New Testament; but *from the days of John the Baptist*, i.e., of his preaching, *the kingdom of heaven suffers violence*.

This is explained in three ways.

First, it is known that in cases of ravishment there is violence and a struggle. Hence it is required that a sinner, if he is able to reach the kingdom of heaven, must climb to spiritual things and struggle a great deal.
It is explained in another way. It is known that rapine, properly speaking, means that something is taken by force contrary to the will of the owner. The preaching of salvation was made to the Jews and then to everyone through Christ: "I have not been sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel" (Mt 15:24). And although he was sent to them, they did not receive him; yet those to whom he was not sent seized it. Hence he says above: "Many shall come from the east and from the west, and shall recline with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven; but the children of the kingdom will be cast into the outer darkness" (Mt 7:12). And below (21:43): "The kingdom of heaven will betaken from you and given to a people producing the fruits of it." Therefore, they have taken it by violence. And this is Hilary's explanation
The third explanation is this: What is taken by violence is snatched quickly; hence Job: "As a torrent which rushes quickly into the valleys": and this is on account of the speed of its movement. And because preaching had so moved men's hearts, the motion seemed swift; therefore, he says, *it suffers violence*, because they tend toward the kingdom after the manner of someone in a hurry. Hence the Gospel began with him and he is its end.

(13) Hence Christ says: *For all the prophets and the Law prophesied until John*, because all the prophets were for the sake of Christ and began to be fulfilled from the time of John's preaching. Hence Luke (24:44): "Everything written about me must be fulfilled." And this *until John*. Does this mean that there were no prophets after John? Do we not read below (23:34): "Behold, I sent you prophets, wise men and scribes"? The answer is that a prophet is sent for two purposes: to strengthen faith and to correct morals: "Where there is no prophecy the people cast off restraint" (Pr 29:18). To strengthen faith, as it says in 1 Peter (1:10): "The prophets who prophesied of the grace that was to be yours searched and inquired about this salvation; they inquired what person or time was indicated by the Spirit of Christ within them." Hence prophecy served those two things: faith has now been established, because Christ's promises have been accomplished. But for the correction of morals, prophecy has never ceased nor will ever cease. Therefore John is outstanding, because he is between the Old and the New Law; hence he was sent before his face, as though at the same time as Christ.

(14) *And if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come*. Here he shows John's greatness as far as the distinction between present and future is concerned. For Elijah was the Lord's precursor; hence Malachi (4:5): "Behold, I will send you Elijah, the prophet...," *and John is Elijah*. but what is the Lord saying? For when John was asked if he was Elijah, he said that he was not. But this refutes a heresy which posited transmigration of souls, namely, that the soul went from one body and entered another body; therefore Elijah's soul had entered John, so they said. But this opinion is false, because he denied that he was Elijah. But Christ said that John was Elijah on account of three similarities: first, because, as one angel is said to be similar to another angel, because they are equal in office, so Elijah and John were equal in office, because both were precursors: "He will go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways" (Lk 1:76). Also as to manner of life, because he led an austere life (1 Kg 19:6). Again, as to persecution, because as he was persecuted by Jezebel, so John by Herod. Hence *if you are willing to accept it* in the sense in which it should be taken, *he is Elijah*.

(15) And so that they might understand that he was speaking in a mystical way, he adds, *he who has ears to hear, let him hear*, i.e., he that has ears spiritually, let him hear and understand.


## 11—2

Mt 11:16-19


> 16. But whereunto shall I esteem this generation to be like? It is like to children sitting in the market place. 17. Who crying to their companions say: We have piped to you, and you have not danced: we have lamented, and you have not mourned. 18. For John came neither eating nor drinking; and they say: He hath a devil. 19. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say: Behold a man that is a glutton and a wine drinker, a friend of publicans and sinners. And wisdom is justified by her children.

(16) *But to what shall I compare this generation?* Here he breaks forth into rebuking the crowd: first, he places a question; secondly, a likeness; thirdly, he explains.

He proceeds, therefore, in this manner: John is compared to Elijah by reason of his office, but to what shall I compare this generation? Why does he say this here? Because as a person who ahs done all he could for someone and he is ungrateful does not know to what he should be compared, so the Lord had done all kinds of favors for this generation; hence Isaiah (5:4): "What more ought I have done for my vineyard, and have not done it?" To what, therefore, can I compare such malice?

It should be noted that in Scripture a generation sometimes is taken for a group of good people, sometimes of wicked, sometimes of both. For a group of good people, Psalm 3:3): "the generation of the just will be blessed"; for a group of wicked people, Matthew (12:39): "An evil and adulterous generation..."; for both, Ec (1:4): "A generation goes and a generation comes, but the earth remains forever."

*It is like children sitting in the market place...* Here he presents a comparison which can be explained according to the literal sense or the mystical. First, he makes a comparison with boys; secondly, he adapts it (v. 18).

It should be noted that it is natural for man to seek pleasures and always to seek them; and unless he is withdrawn by anxieties, he immediately rushes into evil pleasures. But children do not have anxieties; therefore, they spend their time on what befits them, namely, playing. It should also be noted that man is naturally social, because one naturally needs another; hence he delights in being with others, so that the Philosopher says in *Politics* I: "Every man who lives alone is either better than men and is a god, or he is worse than man and is as beast." Hence he says, *sitting in the market place*, because no one wishes to play alone but in the market place, where many are gathered. Also it should be noted that it is natural for man to delight in representations; hence if we see something well sculptured, which well represents what it ought, we are pleased. Therefore boys, who are delighted in games, always make their games consist of some representation, such as of war or something of that sort. Note also that all affections of the soul always end in either of the two emotions, joy or mourning.

(17) *And calling to their playmates*. The sense is this: suppose that some boys are in one place and others in another, so that some should sing and some dance; one group does one thing, the other is to react. If they sing and the others do not respond according to their role, the former are hurt and say: *We sang to you and you did not dance*. Against nothing so moves the spirit as song; hence Boethius in his *Music* tells of a person who was arguing with another in Pythagoras' presence, and the others conversed in song. Then Pythagoras ordered them to sing a different song, and the first man settled down. Therefore it should be noted that some songs are joyful, as it says in Sirach (40:20): "wine and music gladden the heat"; hence it says, *we sang*, i.e., a joyful song, *and you did not dance*. Likewise it happens that just as some are moved to joy, so others to tears; hence Jeremiah (9:17): "Send for the mourning women and let them raise a wailing over us." Therefore the say, *we wailed*, i.e., sang sand songs, *and you did not mourn*.

Mystically by the boys is signified the people of the Old Law, among whom some inspired spiritual joy, as David: "Rejoice, you just, in the Lord" (Ps 33:1); some grief, as Joel (2:13): "'Turn to the Lord with your whole heart, with fasting, with tears and wailing." Hence they can say, *we sang*, i.e., incited to spiritual joy, and you have not acknowledged it; *we wailed*, i.e., invited you to repentance, and you have not accepted.

(18) *John came neither eating nor drinking...* Here he applies the comparison: first, he applies it; secondly, he assigns reasons (v. 19b). Men are drawn to a good life in two ways: some at the sight of holiness, others by the way of companionship. The Lord and John divided the two ways between themselves: John, or rather the Lord through John, shows the way of austerity; he himself shows a way less severe. Yet they were converted by neither. Hence he says, *John came neither eating nor drinking*. And this was literally true, because he was extremely abstemious; and they say, *He has a demon*. Like the hypocrites they turn good into evil.

(19) *The Son of man came eating and drinking*, i.e., using food differently; but to no avail, because they do not believe. They say, *Behold a glutton and a drunkard, a friends of tax collectors*, against what is said in Proverbs (23:20): "Be not among winebibbers, or among gluttonous eaters of meat." Here it should be noted that one who pays attention to what men say will never do any good: "He who observes the wind will not sow, and he who regards the clouds will not reap" (Ec 11:4). But here a question arises: Why did the Lord choose a more lenient life and through John demonstrate a harsher one? The reason is that the Lord supported his actions with miracles, which John did not perform; therefore if he possessed no excellence, his testimony would not have been accepted, as we observe in the saints that one excels in one thing and another in another: thus Augustine was excellent in doctrine but Martin in miracles. Another reason is that John was a man of purity and so abstained from carnal desires; but Christ was God, and if he had taught severity, he would not have been shown to be man. Therefore he assumed a life more human. The final reason was that John was the end of the Old Testament, wherein heavy burdens were imposed; but Christ was the beginning of the New Testament, which proceeds by way of meekness.

*And wisdom is justified by her deeds*. This can be taken in two ways: in one way by turning it back to whatever was said about John and Christ; and then the sense is that when a man does what he ought and the other is not reformed, then the former saves his own sold and is justified in his words. *Wisdom is justified* (this is the Son of God, or Christ), i.e., appeared just to its children, because it manifested what it should have to the just: abstinence by John, meekness by Christ. Or it can be explained another way: the children of the devil say that he is a glutton and a wine-bibber, but the children of wisdom understand that life does not consist in food and drink but in stability of mind, which uses food according to place and time and abstains when it is fitting, so that they o not exceed by using too much or fail by using too little. Accordingly, the Apostle says in Philippians (4:12): "In any and all circumstances I have learned the secret of facing plenty and hunger, abundance and want." Therefore he would not seem to manifest complete wisdom, if he abstained entirely, because it would suppose that all justice lies in abstinence; but it does not lie in thus but in stability of mind.

And note that he says, *wisdom*, because to use food or to abstain in accord with the moderation of wisdom is to abstain when one ought and to partake when one ought.


## 11—3

Mt 11:20-30


> 20. Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein were done the most of his miracles, for that they had not done penance. 21. Woe thee, Corozain, woe to thee, Bethsaida: for if in Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in you, they had long ago done penance in sackcloth and ashes. 22. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment, than for you. 23. And thou Capharnaum, shalt thou be exalted up to heaven? thou shalt go down even unto hell. For if in Sodom had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in thee, perhaps it had remained unto this day. 24. But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee. 25. At that time Jesus answered and said: I confess to thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to little ones. 26. Yea, Father: for so hath it seemed good in thy sight. 27. All things are delivered to me by my Father. And no one knoweth the Son but the Father: neither doth any one know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom it shall please the Son to reveal him. 28. Come to me all you that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you. 29. Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, because I am meek, and humble of heart: And you shall find rest to your souls. 30. For my yoke is sweet and my burden light.

Having satisfied John's disciples, he now rebukes non-believers: first, the Lord's deed is described; secondly, his words (v. 21).

(20) He says, therefore, *Then he began to upbraid the cities*. The upbraiding is concerned with the benefits and with gifts. For the Lord had conferred a great benefit, because he had enlightened them by his presence; but they were ungrateful and, consequently, deserved rebuke: "O my people, what have I done to you? In what way have I wearied you?" (Mic 6:3). And he did not rebuke them for having sinned but for not having done penance; hence Job (24:23): "He gave him opportunity to do penance, and he abused it unto pride" applied to them, as did Romans (2:4): "Do you know that God's kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?"

But there is a textual question, because Luke (10:13) put this in another context. For he places it at the time of sending the disciples, but Matthew here. Augustine's answer is that it seems Luke is following the order of history, but Matthew the order of recollection. But then the objection is raised that here it says, *then*. So it seems that Matthew is also following the order of history. Augustine answers that *then* suggests an indeterminate time. Or, another way, it can be said that he said these words on two occasions, so that it could be *then* according to both Matthew and Luke.

[ *Woe to you, Chorazin...* These are the words of the Lord. First, they are about the suffragan cities, secondly about the metropolis, at *and you Capharnaum* etc. First he compares the sins, then the penalties, at *But I tell you* etc.]

(21) *Woe to you, Chorazin...* These are cities or villages of Galilee, where the Lord had performed many signs, and yet they were not converted. So he says, *Woe to you...* But what is the Lord doing? For it is written in Romans (12:14): "Do not curse..." The answer is that cursing is formal or material: no one should curse formally, but he may curse materially. Hence it should be noted that certain things are joined as far as sense perception goes, but they can be separated in the intellect; thus in an apple are odor and taste, which cannot be separated by sense perception, although they can by the intellect. Similarly, to will that one not be punished and to will the order of justice cannot co-exist except in the intellect. Hence if I curse a person, because I delight in his harm, it is evil. But if not for his evil but for the order of justice, then it is good. Hence the Lord's word is not the word of one taking pleasure, but the word of one desiring justice.

*Woe to you, Chorazin...* Chorazin is interpreted "a service to him," Bethsaida, "the house of fruit." To whom more is entrusted, more is demanded. And why did he manifest more there? Because he fulfilled his ministry there; therefore, "God's anger has been revealed from heaven on all ungodliness and the injustice of those men who held back the truth of God" (Rom 1:18). Bethsaida is the house of fruit. Therefore, if the Lord produced much fruit there, and they did no penance, what will happen to them? (Is 5:4): "When I looked for it to yield grapes, why did it yield wild grapes?"

*Woe to you... For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes*. Note the kind of penance, namely, in sackcloth and ashes, because two things induce to penance: one is the remembrance of sins; and this is signified by sackcloth, which is made from the hairs of she-goats: for that animal was immolated for sin. The other is the consideration of death and the condition of human frailty. Hence it says in Genesis (3:19): "you are dust and into dust you shall return"; and Job (42:6): "Therefore I despise myself and repent in dust and ashes."

(22) *But I tell you: it shall be more tolerable on the day of judgment for Tyre and Sidon than for you*. Here he compares guilt with guilt, because if they are found heavier in guilt, it will be worse for them; for they did not do what they heard. Therefore it is more serious, as John says (15:22): "If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin." Note that those words exclude three errors.

For some said that all sins are equal, and likewise punishments. —He excludes this when he says that it will be worse for them than for Tyre and Sidon.
Again, some said that only those foreknown will be saved, because, if he preached to them, they would be converted. —He excludes this when he says that it will go ill with Tyre and Sidon, but worse for those others to whom the kingdom of heaven was announced. Hence Augustine says: "The Lord does not reward what they would have done, but what they have done."
Then he removes the third error, namely, that the Lord sent prophets and preachers to the Jews and not to the rest, because he knew that the others would not receive them. —But he excludes this, because if they had been preached to, they would have done penance.

But the question remains: if the Jews did not believe, it seems that the Lord did not act properly by not sending to those who would have believed.

Gregory says that it is not for man to know God's secrets; yet, as it seems, he preached first to the Jews in fulfillment of the promises made to the patriarchs. Furthermore, in order that their condemnation would be proved more just, he preached to them and later sent disciples to the others.
Remy answers this way: although many from Tyre and Sidon would have believed, some among them were perverse and not yet prepared to believe. Therefore, he did not send to them first.
Augustine gives another explanation, namely, that the Lord foreknew that if they had believed, they would not have persevered at the time of the passion; therefore, he did not send to them.
Another explanation of Augustine's is that predestination is foreknowledge of God's favors. Hence whatever pertains to salvation is the effect of predestination in the predestined. Consequently, God distributes his gifts in various ways, because he gives to some a docile heart and an inclination to act well; but this is not enough, unless there is an instructor. Again, sometimes there is an instructor, but the heart is hard; and just as in the former the facility to believe is not enough, so in the latter the hard heart is harmful. Hence it is foolish to ask why he chose this one and not that one. Wherefore, Augustine says: "Why he draws one and not another, do not judge, if you do not wish to err." Hence it is better that the entire affair be turned back to God's ordination than to man's merits.

(23) *And you, Capernaum, will you be exalted to heaven?* In this section he upbraids a more famous city: first, he rebukes pride, because the greater are more boastful; secondly, he upbraids their impenitence (v. 23b). In regard to the first: first, he rebukes their pride; secondly, he threatens a punishment. He says, therefore, *And you, Capernaum...* This sentence can be taken in two ways: one is interrogative, namely, *will you be exalted to heaven?* The other: You are the city which has been exalted to heaven, because it was exalted by the Lord, by the Lord's presence and by many miracles: "The things we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in your city" (Lk 4:23). You have also been exalted by yourself; hence will you be exalted by pride or my teaching? But no matter how you have been exalted, *you shall be brought down to Hades*: "Dragged off in the day of God's wrath; this is the wicked man's portion from God" (Jb 20:28). Hence the proper punishment of the proud is to be hurled down. Isaiah (14:14) against one who said, "I will ascend above the eights of the clouds," answers "You will be brought down to hell." Then he rebukes their impenitence: first, he compares their guilt; secondly, their punishment. He says, therefore, *For if in Sodom*... Why does he say this? To denote freedom of judgment, because before a man is life and death. No one warned them; for although Lot was present among them, he worked no miracles. But the others saw the Lord teaching and working miracles. Therefore... Capernaum is interpreted as village most sweet, as is Jerusalem.

(24) *But I tell you...* On the day of judgment your punishment will be more severe than of that land which was destroyed. Or it can be understood of the inhabitants: "The servant who knows his master's will and does not do it, will be beaten with many stripes" (Lk 12:47).

*At that time Jesus declared: I thank you, Father...* Above the Lord upbraided the unbelief of the crowd; now he gives thanks for the faith of the disciples and other believers. First, he gives thanks to the Father as author; secondly, he shows that he has the same power (v. 27). He says, therefore, *At that time*, namely, when it happened, *Jesus answered*. But whom did he answer? To him are applied the words of Job (15:2): "Does a wise person answer as though talking to the wind?" No. Therefore, he is responding to a tacit objection. For someone could say: Those to whom you preached do not believe, but others would have believed, had you preached to them. Therefore he answers and with the answer rebukes those who sought the causes of election, namely, why they were elevated to heaven and the others cast down to hell; as Origen, who held that election is due to merits. But here he rejects this by showing that it must be attributed to the divine will. He says, therefore, *I thank [confess to] you, Father...* It should be noted that confession is threefold, namely, of faith; hence it says in Romans (10:10): "Man believes with his heart and so is justified, and he confesses with his lips and so is saved." Then, confession of sins: "Confess your sins to one another" (Jas 5:16). Finally, there is the confession of thanksgiving, about which Psalm 106 (v. 1): "Confess to the Lord, because he is good..." This is the one meant here.

(25) Two heresies are excluded, namely of Sabellius, who did not distinguish the Son from the Father; hence he says, *I confess to you, Father*. Thus he confesses the authority of the Father. Also that they are of the same nature; therefore he calls him *Father*, against Arius. And truly *Lord*, because he is Father of heaven and earth; so in Psalm 100 (v. 3): "Know that the Lord is God; he made us and not we ourselves." He calls him Father, not because he created him but because he begot him: "He shall cry to me: You are my father" (Ps 89:27).

And why does he give thanks? On account of the distinction he made; and he puts it thus: *Because you have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes [little ones]*. Hence it is important here to consider who the little ones are, who the wise, and who the prudent. There are three senses in which persons are called little ones. Literally, little ones are the despicable: "I will make you small among the nations, you shall be utterly despised" (Obad v. 2). Likewise, one is little by reason of humility, because he has lowly sentiments about himself. Hence the Lord says below (18:3): "Unless you be converted and become as little children, you shall not enter the kingdom of heaven." Then by reason of simplicity; hence in 1 Corinthians (14:20): "Be little ones in malice." Hence that passage can mean: because you have revealed them to little ones and lowly fishermen. And why? The Apostle gives the reason in 1 Corinthians (1:27): "God has chosen the despised of this world to confound the strong." Augustine explains "to the little ones," i.e., to the humble, to those not presuming on themselves; for where humility is, there is wisdom. Hilary explains it of the simple: "Seek him in simplicity" (Wis 1:1).

On the other hand are the wise and the prudent who are versed in carnal wisdom: "Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom" (Jer 9:23). He did not reveal these things to them but to peasants, who do not trust in their own wisdom: "I said, 'I will be wise,' but it was far from me. That which is, is far off" (Ec 7:23). Wherefore the Apostle to the Romans (10:3): "Ignorant of God's righteousness and seeking to establish their own, they did not submit to God's righteousness." Also by the wise he understands the proud, vaunting themselves. He did not reveal it to these: "Claiming to be wise, they became foolish" (Rom 1:22). Likewise he calls wise those who live according to the flesh, who seek the things of the flesh and not of God" (Phil 2:21). Again "they are wise for doing evil and do not know how to do good" (Jer 4:22). *And revealed them*: "You must no longer live as the gentiles do, in the futility of their minds" (Eph 4:17). Hence you have hidden from the wise while revealing to little ones. He hides wisdom from the wise by not applying grace: "He gave them up to a reprobate sense" (Rom 1:28).

(26) But why does he give thanks for hiding these things? I say that he did not do this as though rejoicing in their blindness but in the judgment of God, who arranged things so wisely. And why? Here the cause is not investigated, for in such matters God's will is taken as the cause. *Yes, Father, for such was your gracious will*. An artisan can easily assign the reason why he put certain stones in the foundation and others above it; but why he put this one here and another there, the only cause is his will. Similarly, that God saves certain ones is a tribute to his mercy; that he damns others is due to his justice. But why he dealt mercifully with one rather than another pertains solely to his will. Hence Romans (9:18): "So then he has mercy upon whomever he wills, and he hardens the heart of whomever he wills." Hence he acts by reason of his pleasure: "Make pleasing the homage of my lips" (Ps 119:108).

(27) *All things have been delivered to me by my Father*. He had given thanks to the Father, because he revealed his secrets to little ones. But someone might suppose that he himself could not reveal; hence he excludes this: first, he touches on the greatness of his own power; secondly, he invites people to himself, as though saying, "I am powerful" (v. 28).

First, he does two things: first, he states that he is equal to the Father; secondly, he applies it spiritually to what he said (v. 27b).

He says, therefore: Someone could ask whether he can do all things. He answers that *all things have been delivered to me by my Father*. But note the equality, although the origin is from the Father, which is against Sabellius. But what is meant by *all things* ? This can be explained in three ways:

*all things*, i.e., above every creature, as blow (28:18): "All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me."
Or *all things*, i.e., the elect and predestined, who have been given in a special way: "Yours they were and you have given them to me" (Jn 17:6).
Likewise, *all things*, namely, intrinsic, i.e., every perfection of the godhead: "As the Father has life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have life in himself" (Jn 5:26). And we should not understand this in a bodily sense, because if he gave, he also kept it for himself. This explanation is Augustine's and Hilary's.

But someone could ask: How did he give? Therefore, he tells how, when he says, *from my Father*. Hence he received this by generation. *And no one knows the Son except the Father*. Now he adapts his statement in a specific way to his proposition not only that he is equal to the Father but also consubstantial. From the substance of the Father exceeds all understanding, since the very essence of the Father is said to be unknowable, as is the essence of the Son. Hence there the equality is noted and Arius answered, who said that the Father is invisible but the Son visible. *And no one knows the Son except the Father*. But what is this? Did not the saints know? It must be said that they knew him by attaining their goal or by faith, but not by comprehending. But does not the Holy Spirit know? Yes. But it should be noted that limiting statements are sometimes added to the essential divine names and sometimes to the personal names. And when they are added to the personal names, they do not exclude that which is the same by nature; hence terms added to the Father do not exclude the Son. Hence where it says, "honor and glory to the immortal King, the invisible and only God" (1 Tim 1:17), the others of the same nature are not excluded. Similarly, when he says, *no one knows...*, the Holy Spirit is not excluded, for he is the same in nature. But when he says, *no one knows*, it means no man except the Son. And thus it is shown that the Father knows the Son. But this is contrary to Origen. For the Son knows by comprehension. Therefore, because he knows perfectly and is knowable, he has the power to reveal, as the Father has; hence he says, *and anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him*. For manifestation is by means of a word:"Father, I have manifested your name to men..." (Jn 17:18) and 1:18): "No one has ever seen God." But he knew him; therefore, he could manifest him. Consequently, what he had said of the Father he attributed to himself. For he had said, *You have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to little ones*. The Son also can do this, in as much as he has the same power.

(28) *Come to me, all you...* Come to my blessings. First, the invitation; secondly, the need for the invitation; thirdly, its utility. He says, therefore: *Come to me*. This is also the word of Wisdom: "Come to me, you who desire me, and eat your fill of my produce" (Sir 24:19). Hence, draw near to me, you untaught, because I want to communicate myself. But what is the need? Because without me men labor too much: *all you who labor*. In a special way this can be applied to the Jews, because they labored under the yoke of the Law and commandments, as it says in Acts (15:10): "This is a burden which we neither we nor our fathers have been able to bear." Likewise, in general, to all who labor on account of human frailty: "I am poor and acquainted with labors from my youth" (Ps 88:15). *And are heavy laden*, namely, with sins: "My iniquities weigh like a burden too heavy for me" (Ps 38:4).

And what shall we get, if we come to you? *I will give you rest [refresh you]*. "If anyone thirsts,let him come to me and drink" (Jn 7:37). Then he explains the invitation: first, he explains; secondly, he assigns the reason (v. 30). Having presented the invitation and its purpose, he now wants to explain what that invitation is, when he says, *take my yoke upon you*. But what is this? You say that you want to refresh us and lift our labor from us, and in the same breath you tell us to carry a yoke? We believed that it would not involve a yoke. Yes, without the yoke of sin: "For the yoke of his burden, and the staff for his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, you have broken": (Is 9:4). Not that you are without God's law, but without the yoke of sin: "Let us cast off from us their yoke" (Ps 2:3); "Return, O Israel, to the Lord your God, for you have stumbled, because of your iniquity" (Hos 14:1); "Freed from sin, you have become slaves of righteousness" (Rom 6:18).

(29) *Take*, therefore, *my yoke*,namely, the gospel lessons. And he says, *yoke*, because just as a yoke fastens and joins the necks of oxen, so the doctrine of the gospel fastens the people to its yoke. And what is that *Learn from me, for I am meek and humble of heart* ? The whole Law consists in two things: meekness and humility. By meekness a man is rightly ordered to his neighbor; hence Ps 132 (v. 1): "Remember, O Lord, David and all his meekness." By humility he is rightly ordered to himself and to God: "Upon whom will my spirit rest except on the calm and meek" (Is 66:2)? Hence humility makes a man capable of God. He had also said, "and I will refresh you." What is this refreshment? *You will find rest for your souls*. For the body is not refreshed, as long as it is afflicted, and when it is not afflicted any more, it is said to be refreshes. And just as hunger is to the body, so desire is to the mind; hence the achievement of desires is refreshing: "Who satisfies your desire with good" (Ps 103:5). And this rest is a rest of the soul: "I have labored little and found for myself much rest" (Sir 51:27). The meek are not at rest this way in the world; hence they will find eternal rest, namely, the fulfillment of desires.

(30) But do not wonder if I invite you to a yoke, because my yoke is not a burden. Why? *For my yoke is easy* and delightful: "How sweet are your words to my taste!" (Ps 119:103). *And my burden is light*. And these can be referred to two things: by the yoke the oxen are held, but the burden is carried; hence the yoke is referred to the negative precepts, the burden to the affirmative.

But this seems to be false, because the burden of the New Law seems very heavy, as was said above (5:21): "You have heard that it was said of old: You shall not kill. But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be liable to the judgment." So it seems that it is a heavier burden: "Narrow is the way, which leads to life." Likewise the Apostle in 2 Corinthians (11:23): "In many labors." Hence the yoke seems most burdensome. Therefore, three things must be considered: the effect of the teaching, the act and the circumstances. And in all three it is light.

The doctrine of Christ is light in its effect, because it changes the heart, in as much as it makes us love not temporal but spiritual things. For the person who loves temporal things finds it more a burden to lose a little than a person who loves spiritual things to lose much. The Old Law did not forbid those temporal things; therefore it was painful to lose them. But now, even though it is burdensome in the beginning, after a while it is light: "I will lead you in the paths of uprightness. When you walk, your steps will not be hampered" (Pr 4:11).
Likewise, in regard to its act, the Law imposed a burden of external acts. But our law is solely in the will; hence Romans (14:11): "the kingdom of God is not food and drink." Again, the law of Christ brings joy; hence Romans (14:17): "Justice and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit."
Likewise, in regard to circumstances there are many adversities; hence "All who desire to lead a godly life in Christ Jesus will suffer persecution" (2 Tim 3:12). But they are not burdensome, because they are seasoned with the condiment of love; for when a person loves someone, it is not a burden to suffer anything for him. Hence love makes easy all difficult and impossible things. Therefore, if one loves Christ properly, nothing is difficult for him; consequently, the New Law does not impose a burden.
