# Chapter 10

> 1. And having called his twelve disciples together, he gave them power over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of diseases, and all manner of infirmities. 2. And the names of the twelve Apostles are these: The first, Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, 3. James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the publican, and James the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, 4. Simon the Cananean, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. 5. These twelve Jesus sent: commanding them, saying: Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the city of the Samaritans enter ye not. 6. But go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. 7. And going, preach, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand. 8. Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out devils: freely have you received, freely give. 9. Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money in your purses: 10. Nor scrip for your journey, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor a staff; for the workman is worthy of his meat. 11. And into whatsoever city or town you shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy, and there abide till you go thence. 12. And when you come into the house, salute it, saying: Peace be to this house. 13. And if that house be worthy, your peace shall come upon it; but if it be not worthy, your peace shall return to you. 14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words: going forth out of that house or city shake off the dust from your feet. 15. Amen I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.

Having presented his doctrine, he now appoints ministers, who are described by number, power and listing of their names.

(1) By number: hence he says, *he called to him his twelve disciples*. Why twelve? In order to show the conformity between the New and the Old Testaments, because in the Old there were twelve patriarchs; and the disciples were also twelve. The second reason was to show the power and effects accomplished through them. For this number is composed by multiplying three by four, i.e., four three times or three four times. By the three the Trinity is signified; by the four the world. Therefore, it expresses that their preachers should be spread over the whole world; hence Mark (16:15): "Go into the whole world and preach the gospel to every creature." Also to denote perfection, because twelve consists of two sixes; but six is a perfect number, because its parts are few. For it is made from one, two and three, and those parts added together make six. Hence he called that many to denote perfection: "Be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect" (Mt 5:48).

He follows with their power, because *he gave them power...*, namely, to do or be able to do as he did. And not only what he did but greater (Jn 14:12). For there is no record that the sick were cured by Christ's shadow, as is recorded of the many cured by Peter's shadow falling on them (Acts 5:15). *Power over unclean spirits, to cast them out*. Hence he did not will that they cast them out as he did; bur he did it by his word, but they in the name of Christ. Hence Mark (16:17): "In my name they shall cast our demons..." And not only the power to cast our demons, but *to heal every disease and every infirmity*: They will lay their hands on the sick and they will recover" (Mk 16:18). But if you ask why that power is not given to preachers now, Augustine answers that already visible is the greatest miracle, namely, that the entire world has been converted. Therefore, either there were miracles performed, and then I have proved my point; or if there were not, that is the greatest, because the entire world has been converted by fishermen, the lowliest of men.

(2) The list of their names is presented. Why? So that if a false prophet arose and claimed to be an apostle, he would not be believed. For this reason the letter of the foundation, i.e., of Manicheus, was rejected. And it should be noted that he always lists them by two's, because it is the number for charity. Also, wherever he mentions any with the same name, he indicates something by which they are distinguished. It should also be noted that he does not follow the order of rank, although Peter is always mentioned first. He is also called Simon, i.e., obedient; hence it says in Proverbs (16:20): "The obedient man shall speak of victory." *Peter* is named rock on account of solidity; and Cephas, which is a Syrian, not Hebraic name. *Andrew*, virile; hence it says in Psalm 27 (v. 14): "Be strong and let your heart take courage." (3) *Philip, the mouth of the lamp; such a one should be a preacher*: "Your word is well tried with fire" (Ps 119:140). *Bartholomew*, the son of him who curbs the waters. This is what Christ is called: "He binds up the waters in thick clouds" (Jb 26:8). Then *James, the son of Zebedee*, who was killed by Herod, who is called the supplanter. And *John*, who is called grace: "By the grace of God I am what I am: (1 Cor 15:10). — He does not follow the order of rank as Mark does. &8212; Then *Thomas and Matthew*. The others do not say, "tax collector," but he mentions it out of humility. Again, the others place Matthew before Thomas; but he does the opposite. *Thomas* means abyss, on account of the depth of faith. *Matthew* means forgiving, as in Ephesians (4:32): "Forgiving one another, as Christ forgave you." *James the son of Alpheus*, to distinguish him from the other. He is called a brother of the Lord, because he was a cousin. *Thaddeus*, the brother of James. He is called Jude, who wrote an epistle, and means heart: "Keep your heart with all vigilance" (Pr 4:23). (4) Then *Simon the Cananaean*, from the village of Cana. And *Judas Iscariot*, to distinguish him from the other Jude; and it is taken either from the village or from the stock of the tribe of Issachar, who is called death. *Who betrayed him*. Why is he listed? To give an example that dignity of rank does not make a person holy. Another reason is to remind us that it scarcely happens that in a large group someone is not evil. Therefore, he is listed to show that good persons are sometimes not without wicked ones: "As a lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters" (S of S 2:2). Augustine: "My house is not better than the Lord's house."

(5) *These twelve* Jesus chose and appointed propagators of Sacred Scripture, *charging them...* Here he mentions their instruction: first, he instructs them by word; secondly, be deed (c. 11). By word on three matters: first, on their office; secondly, on money for expenses (v. 9); thirdly, on the dangers (v. 16). In regard to their office he command four things: first, where to go; secondly, what to say (v. 7); thirdly, what to do (v. 8); fourthly, for what purpose (v. 8b). First, he tells where they should not go, secondly, where they should go (v. 6). In regard to the first he says two things: first, *Go nowhere among the gentiles, and enter no town of the Samaritans*. The latter were midway between the gentiles and the Jews and were mentioned in 2 Kings (24 ff). They followed the Jewish rite in part and in part the rite of the gentiles. They were quite contrary to the Jews; hence he forbade them to go to those strictly gentile and those partly gentile. But this seems opposed to what he said below (28:19): "Go, teach all nations," and to Isaiah (40:5): "And all flesh shall see together that the mouth of the Lord has spoken." The answer is that they were sent to both; but due order had to be observed, because first to the Jews. And one reason is that the first thing to be done is what justice demands rather than what arises from mercy; but justice required that they preach first to the Jews, because they had the promises: "I tell you that Christ became a servant to the circumcised to confirm the promises given to the patriarchs" (Rom 15:8). But they were bound to the gentiles out of mercy, for it says in Romans (11:17) that the gentiles were wild shoots received into the olive tree, namely, by the faith of the patriarchs: "You, a wild olive shoot, were grafted in their place to share the root and richness of the olive tree." Furthermore, in his desire to introduce believers to the faith of the fathers, he commanded that the faith be preached first to the Jews.

The second reason is that the Lord infused into everyone whatever they were disposed for; but many of the Jews were already disposed by faith. And just as fire first kindles things near it, so the Lord out of charity desired the welfare of those who were near. hence it says in Isaiah (57:19): "Peace to the far and peace to the near, says the Lord." Furthermore, if he had gone first to the gentiles, the Jews, who very much hated the gentiles, would have rejected him out of indignation; therefore, in Acts (13:46): "It was necessary for the kingdom of God to be preached to you first." Hence he says, *Go nowhere among the gentiles*, i.e., do not go near the roads that lead to the gentiles, lest they talk about you. But he does not say, "the roads of the Samaritans." Mystically: God's disciples should not go anywhere among the gentiles or the heretics; hence Jeremiah (2:18: "What do you gain by going to Egypt to drink muddy waters?"

(6) *But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel*. Why sheep? Because they were lost more by the fault of the Pharisees than by their own. Hence Psalm 90 (v. 3): "We are his people and the sheep of his pasture" and 1 Peter (2:25): "You were straying like sheep, but now have returned to the shepherd and guardian of your souls." But what will they do, as they go about? *Preach as you go*: "I have appointed you to go and bear fruit, fruit that remains" (Jn 15:16).

(7) So he sends them as he was sent, to preach. Hence *Do penance...* and as Jesus had begun (above 4:17): "Do penance,": so he commands them. He had begun: "Do penance, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand"; "For salvation is far from sinners" (Ps 119:155), but now it is near through the passion of Christ: "With his own blood he entered once into the holy place, thus securing an eternal redemption" (Eeb 9:12). Hence he says, *is at hand*, namely, through my passion. So it is established in them by partaking of grace: "The whole kingdom of God is within you" (Lk 17:21).

(8) But they could say: How shall we confirm what we say? Certainly by miracles as he did. So he says, *Heal the sick...* But if someone asks why the Church does not work miracles now, the answer is given that miracles were preformed to prove the faith, but now the faith has even been approved. Therefore, just as a person who formulated one demonstration to prove some conclusion would have no need for another one, so here. Hence the greatest miracle is the conversion of the whole world, so there is no need for other ones. But just as the other miracles were bodily, so every day spiritual miracles are performed, because the spiritually infirm are cured. For the infirm are those tossed about by sin and those prone to sin: "Welcome the man who is weak in faith" (Rom 14:1), and they are healed by the Lord. But those who consent are dead, because separated from God, as it says in Ephesians (5:14): "Awake, you sleeper, and arise from the dead." Likewise, lepers are cleansed; for lepers are those who infect others, because leprosy is a contagious disease, and sometimes they are cured. In 2 Kings (5:27) it is recorded that the leprosy of Naaman cleaved to Gehozi. Furthermore, devils are cast out; for devils are ones who have already committed sin: "They rejoice in doing evil and delight in the perverseness of evil"(Pr 2:14), and as is said of Judas (Jn 13:27): "Satan entered into him." And these are sometimes cured.

But because the apostles could say: "Now we shall be rich; if we perform miracles, we shall have much." This was the reason Simon Magus wanted to perform miracles. But the Lord excludes this, saying, *You received without pay, give without pay*. It is great to perform miracles, but it is greater to live virtuously. Hence he removes pride from them, because pride can happen in two ways: either from cupidity or from deserts. For the highest form of pride appears when a person ascribes to himself the good he has. Therefore he excludes this, because *you have received*: "What do you have that you have not received?" (1 Cor 4:7). Furthermore, you should be proud, because these things are not from your merits but are freely given. For one who obtains from merit does not receive as freely given. He also excludes cupidity: *give without pay*, i.e., not for something temporal. For the price of a thing is either more or equal. For that which you hand over for a price is not as fixed in your heart as the price you receive. But nothing is equal to God's gift, or greater: "Neither did I liken to her any precious gem, because all gold is but a little compared to her" (Wis 7:9).

(9) *Take no gold...*, because they could say: On what are we to live. So he instructs them about expenses: first, he forbids them to carry anything for expenses; secondly, he teaches from whom to accept hospitality (v. 11). He says, therefore, *Take no gold*. But note the words that follow: *nor sandals*, whereas Mark (6:9) says: "Wear sandals." Matthew says, *nor a staff*; Mark says: "Take nothing... but a staff." Consequently, these words engender doubt and difficulty, for the saying, *take no gold...* is either a precept or a counsel. But it is certainly a precept, because it says that *Jesus charged them...* But the apostles were both apostles and believers. Therefore, it was a precept for them either as believers or as apostles. If as believers, then all believers are bound to this; and this was a heresy, as Augustine says, which taught that no one can be saved except those who possess nothing. Again, there was another heresy that no one would be saved, unless he went about without shoes. These were heresies, not because they commanded something evil, but because they denied that non-observers were on the path to salvation. But if they were commanded in as much as they were apostles, then all prelates, who are successors of the apostles, are bound to these thins.

But granted that they did not act wickedly, did not Paul act wickedly by carrying money and accepting it from some to give to others. Therefore, these words bristle with difficulties. So it must be said, according to Jerome, that he commanded something on account of their office as apostles, and not that it is necessary absolutely, but for that time. Hence before the Passion he charged them to carry nothing, but at the time of the Passion he says in Luke (22:35): "When I sent you out with no purse or bag or sandals, did your lack anything? They said, 'Nothing'." Then he continues: "But now, let him who has a purse take it, and likewise a bag. And let him who has no sword sell his mantle and buy one." Hence before the Passion they were sent to the Jews, among whom it was the custom to provide for their teachers. That is why he commanded them to carry nothing, when he sent them to the Jews. But that was not the custom among the gentiles; therefore, when they were sent to the gentiles, they were permitted to carry living expenses. Hence they carried them when they preached to others than the Jews. And because some things are for tour needs and others for purchasing what we need, that is what is said, namely, that some riches are made by art, such as clothing and shoes; therefore, he forbids both types. So he says, *take no gold...*, because money is made of gold or silver or brass Hence Peter said: "'Gold and silver I have none, but what I have I give to you" (Acts 3:6). But why did the Lord give this command? Because he sent poor men to preach; therefore, some could not believe that they preached only for the income. So in order to remove that suspicion, he ordered them to carry nothing. He also did it in order to leave no room for worry; for if they were too concerned about this, the word of God would be impeded. He likewise forbids riches which help in case of need.

(10) And because they could say, "We shall not take gold or silver, but we can take a bag for eggs and bread, which are necessary for food," he even forbids this. *No bag for your journey*. But why did he forbid even this? Chrysostom says that it was in order to manifest his power to them, because he was able to send them off without these things. Hence Luke (22:35): "When I sent you without staff and bag, did you lack anything?" Therefore, he did it to show his power. Again, as to clothing, *nor two tunics*: not that they should possess only one tunic, but that they should not have two sets of clothing, such that they would sore one and wear the other. Hence by "one tunic" is understood one set of clothing: "He that has two coats, let him give to him that has none" (Lk 3:11). *Nor sandals*. Why did he forbid these?

There are two causes with the same reason as for the gold and silver. The Lord sent them in such a way that they would be regarded as poor by all. Hence the Apostle in 1 Corinthians (1:26): "God called not many that were powerful." Therefore he wanted them to be lowly; for in the East the poor go about without shoes, although they do use footwear made of straw. Accordingly, he wanted them to go about as the poor of that country. And another reason — as Plato taught that men should not much cover their feet or head — in order to condition them in endurance he commanded that they go barefooted. *Nor a staff*. What is the reason? For some use horses, while others are kept upright with a staff. But he forbids even that slight thing, in order that they put their entire trust in him: "Your rod and your staff comfort me" (Ps 23:4). Hence what he says elsewhere, that they should carry a staff, was not a command but something to observe for the place and the time.
Augustine follows another path, saying that these are not precepts or counsels, but permissions, so that to abstain is more a counsel than to fulfill. Hence the sense is *take no...*, i.e., it is not necessary to own any shoes but those you are wearing. *Nor a staff*, i.e., nothing, as it is said, "not a speck." And why? *For the laborer is worthy of his hire...*; since you have the power to receive from others, it is not necessary to carry these things. Hence when something is permitted, if it is not done, it is not a sin; whatever is over and above is of supererogation. Hence even Paul, although he could receive from others, accepted nothing; and that was supererogation, as Augustine says, because not to use things permitted is of supererogation. Hence Paul says: "It is better for me to die than to shed my glory" (1 Cor 9:15). And why? Because he did not make use of that permission, *the laborer is worthy of his hire*. But what about the statement elsewhere, that they may carry a staff? Augustine says that it is not out of place for things to be said mystically sometimes and literally at other times. Hence what he says here in Matthew, namely, that they should not take a bag, he says literally; but what Mark says is understood mystically, namely, that they should not carry temporal things but have the power to accept them from others. Hence *for the laborer is worthy of his hire.* The "for" in this sentence is not causal. The workers are those mentioned above: "Pray the Lord of the harvest to send laborers into his harvest."
The third explanation is *take [possess] no gold*, i.e., worldly wisdom, *silver*, worldly eloquence, or *a bag*, i.e., anxiety, *or two tunics*, i.e., duplicity, *or sandals*, i.e., love of material things, for sandals are made from the hides of dead animals.

(11) *And whatever town or village you enter...* Above the Lord ordained that the apostles take no sustenance with them, and the reason he gave is that *the laborer is worthy of his hire*; now he declares how they should accept. First, he gives the way, because they should accept from those willing to give; secondly, what should be done in regard to those not willing (v. 14).

In regard to the first he does three things: first, he teaches them to select a host; secondly, he forbids them to change lodgings (v. 11b); thirdly, he tells them to salute the host (v.12).

He says, therefore: "It has been said that *the laborer is worthy of his hire*, in order that you know from whom you should receive, and lest you suppose that anyone's house be granted to you. Therefore, *whatever town or village you enter, find out who is worthy in it*, lest the host's bad reputation cause your preaching to be despised: "He must be well thought of by outsiders" (1 Tim 3:6). The second reason is that if he is a good person, he will more readily minister what you need. And in this he provides for them. The third reason is to exclude suspicion of profit; because when people saw such poor men not taking anything except from the good, it was a sign to them that they were not preaching for gain. The last two explanations are Chrysostom's; the first is Jerome's. And the Apostle says this: "We used neither words nor flattery as a cloak for greed" (1 Th 2:5).

He says, *who is worthy in it*, because it is regarded a great thing for one who receives such guests, as it says in Hebrews (13:2): "Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers, for thereby some have entertained angels unawares." *And stay with him*. Here he teaches about stability of hospitality: *stay with him*. Why? So as not to cause the host sorrow. If he is worthy, he will receive you gladly and be sorry when you must go: "Is evil a payment for good" (Jer 18:20). The second reason is that they not be considered fickle, which does not befit a preacher: "In the serious throng I will praise you" (Ps 35:18). Also that they might avoid the mark of gluttony, because if they left poor hospitality for a good one, it would be charged to gluttony. Therefore, the Lord says that before they enter, they should inquire who in it is worthy.

(12) *As you enter the house, salute it*. Here he speaks of saluting the host: first, he mentions the salutation; secondly, the effect (v. 13). For it was fitting that they minister spiritual things to those who ministered temporal things, and not only spiritual things but things necessary for salvation by saying, *Peace be to this house*. And this was a suitable greeting, because the world was in conflict; but in Christ the world was reconciled. For they were the Lord's legates, and to what end? Certainly for peace; therefore, this greeting was suitable.

(13) Then he continues with the effect both on the good and on the wicked. *And if the house is worthy...* We can say that such a house will obtain a blessing. Hence the apostles or bishops in first turning toward the people say, "Peace be to you." So it says in Numbers (6:27): "They shall invoke my name upon the people of Israel, and I shall bless them." *But if it is not worthy, your peace will return to you*. Why does he say this? Did he not say that they should first inquire? Therefore, he shows that in such inquiries men make mistakes: "Man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart" (1 Sm 16:7). For they were not yet perfect enough to know who was worthy. *Your peace will return to you*. This shows that sometimes someone prays and labors for the salvation of another, and yet he does not obtain the effect. Nevertheless, he does not lose what he did, but it redounds to him. Hence *it will return to you*, i.e., the fruit will be referred to you.

(14) *And if anyone will not receive you...* Here he speaks of those who do not receive: first, he teaches them what to do; secondly, what those will receive from God (v. 15). He says, therefore, *if anyone will not receive you*. He mentions two offenses: one is that they had not received them; the other is that they had not listened to the word of God which they had been sent to preach. Therefore, *as you leave that house or town*, because sometimes they were received in the town but not in any house, and sometimes not even in the town, as is recorded in the Acts of the Apostles. What, therefore, is to be done? *Shake off the dust from your feet*. This is exactly what Paul and Barnabas did (Acts 14:51). But why does the Lord command this? For dust clings to the feet; hence he ordered this to show them that they had made the labor of the journey useless. And this was to be punishment for them. As if to say: because of this you are deserving of damnation. Yet the Apostle says (Phil 2:16): "I have not labored in vain." Another reason is that the least one can have is dust; therefore, he wanted them to shake it off to signify that they would have nothing from them. The third reason is that by dust is signified temporal things, by the feet, affects, to signify that nothing temporal should remain in their affections. The fourth reason is mystical. The feet are their affections; for no matter how holy preachers are, it happens that their affections are stirred by some dust, either by vain glory, as it says in John (c. 13) that Jesus washed the disciples' feet and that he said: "He that is clean needs only to wash his feet, and he is wholly clean." Hence they needed to be washed for venial sins. And why did the Lord command this? To show that the preacher commits himself to danger. Hence if they do not believe him, it redounds to their damnation.

(15) But what is this? Will they not fare worse? *Truly, I say to you, it shall be more tolerable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah than for that city*, because, as it says in John (15:22): "If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have no sin." For they sin more who hear and do not, than those who have never herd. Therefore, perhaps those people from Sodom had not heard, so it will be more tolerable for them. Again, although they were unclean, they offered hospitality. Hence for this reason it will be more tolerable for them. But the opposite is stated in Genesis (c. 19), namely, that the sin of Sodom is the gravest sin, as is clear from the punishment. I answer that it is the gravest in the class of carnal sins. But as in directly against god, such as idolatry, is graver. Or you might answer that he is not comparing sin with sin but with circumstances, because those to whom they preached sinned, which was not true of the others. Likewise it refutes certain heretics who said that all sins are equal, and all punishments, and all merits, and all rewards. Therefore, he excludes this, when he says, *more tolerable...*, because it will be worse for certain sinners.


## 10—2

Mt 10:16-37


> 16. Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be ye therefore wise as serpents and simple as doves. 17. But beware of men. For they will deliver you up in councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues. 18. And you shall be brought before governors, and before kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the Gentiles: 19. But when they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or what to speak: for it shall be given you in that hour what to speak: 20. For it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaketh in you. 21. The brother also shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the son; and the children shall rise up against their parents, and shall put them to death. 22. And you shall be hated by all men for my name's sake: but he that shall persevere unto the end, he shall be saved. 23. And when they shall persecute you in this city, flee into another. Amen I say to you, you shall not finish all the cities of Israel, till the Son of man come. 24. The disciple is not above the master, nor the servant above his lord. 25. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the good man of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household? 26. Therefore fear them not. For nothing is covered that shall not be revealed: nor hid, that shall not be known. 27. That which I tell you in the dark, speak ye in the light: and that which you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the housetops. 28. And fear ye not them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him that can destroy both soul and body in hell. 29. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and not one of them shall fall on the ground without your Father. 30. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. 31. Fear not therefore: better are you than many sparrows. 32. Every one therefore that shall confess me before men, I will also confess him before my Father who is in heaven. 33. But he that shall deny me before men, I will also deny him before my Father who is in heaven. 34. Do not think that I came to send peace upon earth: I came not to send peace, but the sword. 35. For I came to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. 36. And a man's enemies shall be they of his own household. 37. He that loveth father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.

Above the Lord instructed them about their office and the necessities of life; here he instructs them about imminent dangers. In regard to this he does two things: first, he instructs them with a figure of speech; secondly, he explains it (v. 17).

In regard to the first: first, he foretells the dangers; secondly, how they should behave amidst dangers (v. 16b).

(16) He says, therefore: *Behold, I sent you...* Because he had said, *and whatsoever town or village you enter*, and then, *the laborer is worthy of his food*, they could have thought that all should receive them; but he rejects this. As if to say: It will not be so. *Behold, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves*; hence I am sending you into dangers. He says this on two counts, namely, so that it will not be charges to his ignorance or weakness, as though he could not keep them safe; secondly, so that they would not consider themselves deceived. He compares them to sheep on account of meekness, but to persecutors to wolves on account of their rapacity. For Christ himself was a sheep: "He will be led as a sheep to the slaughter" (Is 53:7), and the disciples were sheep: "We are his people and the seep of his pasture" (Ps 95:70). But lest you believe that this does not flow from my will, *I send you in the midst of wolves*: "As the Father has sent me, so I send you" (Jn 20:21). And why did God will to send them into dangers? In order to manifest his power, because if he had sent them armed, it would have been imputed to God's violence rather than to his power; therefore, he sent them poor. For it was a marvel that so many were turned to God by poor, despised and unarmed men, as the Apostle says (1 Cor 1:26): "Not many were powerful, not many were of noble birth; but God chose what is foolish in the world to shame the wise."

*Be prudent as serpents and simple as doves*. Here he shows how they should conduct themselves. For two evils could happen: if the apostles consented to them, evil could befall them; if they acted against them, the same would happen. Therefore, he advises two things, namely, prudence and simplicity: prudence, to evade evils inflicted; simplicity, not to inflict evil. Hence, because I send you, *be prudent*. He wants them to have the prudence of a serpent,

which consists in this, that it always wants to defend its head. Christ is the head, whom he commands them to preserve. Hence 2 Timothy (4:7): "I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith."
They should also preserve the Head, because he is the source of the whole (1 Cor 11:3); "Keep your heart with all vigilance" (Pr 4:23).
Again, another prudence of the serpent is that after a few years it crawls through a narrow opening and sheds its skin. This is what we should do in our manner of life, so that the Apostle says in Colossians (3:9): "Putting off the old man with its practices."
Likewise we should have the prudence of a serpent in preaching, because, as it is written in Genesis (3:1 ff), the human race fell on account of the serpent's cunning, because he attacked the weaker sex.
Likewise, he showed her the tree. Thus, preachers should convert sinners by some suitable means.
Likewise, they should convince them about the tree of the cross, so that just as he succeeded in evil by the wood, so they should make progress in good.

*And simple as doves*. He had compared them to sheep, because they do not murmur back or cause harm; here he compares them to doves,

because they have no anger in their heart.
Again, they are simple against the wiliness which carries one thing in the heart and another in the mouth: "They talk of peace with their neighbor, but evil is in their hearts" (Ps 28:3).
Against torments they have patience and simplicity: "The simplicity of the just will direct them" (Pr 11:3).

(17) Then the dangers are explained: *Beware of men*. First, in general, secondly, by citing each. Because they are simple, they might believe that he sent them in the midst of wolves literally; therefore, he explains, *beware of men*. For each thing should be named from what is in it principally. Hence we must see what is the principal mover in a man. If reason, he is a man; if anger, a bear or a lion; if lust, then it is not a man but a pig or a dog. Hence although by nature they are men, by affect they are wolves: "Man cannot abide in his pomp, he is like the beasts that perish and is become like them" (Ps 49:20); "Be not like a horse or a mule, without understanding.

*They will deliver you up to councils...* First, he tells to whom they will be delivered; secondly, by whom (v. 21). First he shows what has been said; secondly, he comforts them (v. 19). First he tells to whom they will be delivered; secondly, what will happen after that (v. 17b). In regard to the first, this: Such was the custom among the Jews, that if anyone for the first time said or did anything against the Law, he was called to the council and reprimanded; but the second time he was reprimanded and also flogged; if it happened a third time, he was either killed, when they had the power, or handed over to be killed by the one who had the power. And that took place, as is recorded in Acts (4:1 ff & 16). For it is state there that as the apostles were speaking to the people, they were threatened; and after this, when they continued to speak, they were flogged and told not to speak; in the third instance they stoned Stephen and delivered up James to Herod. Therefore, beware, because *they will deliver you up to the council*: "I have not sat with the council of vanity, and I will not enter with those who do evil" (Ps 26:4).

(18) *And you will be dragged before governors and kings*, as to Herod and many others. But you should have great consolation, because *for my sake*, whom you love. Augustine: "Love does all things as though they were slight or nothing." Also, "blessed are those who suffer persecution for justice' sake..." (Mt 5:10). And what will follow from this? This will be *a testimony before them*, i.e., against them, i.e., against the Jews and gentiles. For since they will deliver you up to the council, that will be a testimony against them. Also, because it is before rulers and kings, this will be testimony against them. Hence below (22:34): "Behold, I sent you wise men and scribes; some of them you will kill and some you will flog in your synagogues..." Or in this way: *as a testimony to them*, namely to the Jews and gentiles, because I am sending you to them as witnesses of my faith; hence a martyr is the same as a witness, because by your sufferings you will be witnesses to my Passion:"You shall be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the end of the earth" (Acts 1:8).

(19) *When they deliver you up, do not be anxious how you are to speak or what you are to say*. The apostles could say that they are stupid fishermen and will be stupefied; and this is not strange, because Moses, who had been instructed in the Law, when the Lord commanded him to go to Pharaoh, said: "I am slow of speech" (Ex 4:10). Therefore, to exclude this he says, *when they deliver you up...*, and he does three things: first, he removes the stupor; secondly, he promises the gift of wisdom (v. 19b); thirdly, the author of the gift (v. 20). Therefore, do not think about these matters, neither about what to say nor how to say it. The first pertains to wisdom; the second to eloquence. But opposed to this seems to be something Peter says in his letter (1 Pt 3:15):"Always ready to satisfy everyone demanding a reason for the faith and hope in you." Chrysostom answers that when one must answer and has time to think, he should not wait for divine help. But when the apostles were in trouble, they did not have time; therefore, they entrusted themselves to the Son of God. Similarly, when anyone has the ability, he should do what he can; but if he does not have time, he should entrust himself to the Son of God, although he should not tempt God, if he has time to think. Therefore, the Lord did not merely say, *do not be anxious...*, but *when they deliver you up..., do not be anxious about what to say*. From that promise it follows that "all our words are in God's hand" (Wis 7:16) and ":I will be in your mouth and I will teach what you are to say" (Ex 4:12) and "I will give you a tongue and wisdom" (Lk 21:15).

(20) But who is the author? Certainly the Holy Spirit, *for it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you*. Something like this is expressed by Paul in 2 Corinthians (13:3): "do you want proof that Christ is speaking in me?" But does not this make them seem possessed? It should be noted that every action proceeding from two causes, one of which is the principal actor and the second instrumental, should be named from the more principal. But they were acting instrumentally, the Holy Spirit principally; therefore, the entire action should be named from the Holy Spirit. It is also well to consider that sometimes a spirit moves by disturbing the reason, sometimes by strengthening it. Hence this is the difference between a movement of the devil and of the Holy Spirit. For man is not master except through reason, by which he is free; hence when a man is not moved according to reason the movement is one of possession. When he is moved with reason, he is said to be moved by the Holy Spirit. For the movement by the devil disturbs reason. But the apostles, although moved by the Holy Spirit, retained their reason; therefore, they spoke from themselves and not as one possessed. Hence he brings them to prophetic truth, as it says in 2 Peter (1:19): "we have the prophetic word made more sure."

(21) But the apostles could say: Who will deliver us up? We have no enmities. First therefore he shows by whom they will be delivered up; secondly, he proffers consolation (v. 22b).

Since someone can wickedly be on guard against persecution foretold to him in a general way only, he foretells it in particular. And he says two things in regard to the first: *brother will deliver up brother*. Sometimes it has literally happened that a father delivered up a son, and conversely; and a brother, his brother, either out of fear or hatred. For such is the virtue of faith that between men not of the same faith a strong friendship is hardly possible. And that is what he says: *brother will deliver up brother...* Hence it says in Jeremiah (9:4): "Let everyone put no trust in his brother." And for this reason it is necessary that they beware both on account of the harm a man suffers and on account of the loss of friendship: "If my enemy had taunted me, I would have stood it" (Ps 55:12). But there is more, because you are not going to acquaintances but to strangers.

(22) And this will not help, because *you will be hated by all men*. Hence John (16:10): "The hour is coming when anyone who kills you will think he is doing a service for God." But was this really true? Were there not many who received them? Therefore, he was speaking of men who lived on a human plane. but others, who were of God, received them. However, the cause of this is given: "If you were of the world, the world would love its own; but because you are not of the world, therefore the world hates you" (Jn 15:18). The Lord also promised consolation, because *for my name's sake*. For this should be sweet to you to suffer for my name, as it says in 1 Peter (4:14): "If you are reproached for the name of Christ, you are blessed." Again, he consoled them in another way, because they should arrive at their great success by way of tribulation For since he foresaw that many would fall, he urges them to persevere; because *he who perseveres to the end will be saved*. Hence 2 Timothy (4:7): "I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. As to the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the just judge, will award to me on that day." Hence in Leviticus (3:9) it is said that the fat tail, i.e., the end, was offered.

(23) *When they persecute you in one town, flee to another*. In the beginning of this section he mentioned the dangers, when he said, *behold, I send you...* Here he teaches how they should behave. This is divided into two parts: first, he teaches them to beware of evils and dangers as to prudence: secondly, to maintain equanimity in dangers (v. 26).

In regard to the first: first, he teaches them to avoid bodily danger; secondly, spiritual (v. 24).

In regard to the first he does two things: first, he suggests the evil of dangers; secondly, he answers a tacit objection (v. 23b).

He says, therefore: I have said that *he who perseveres to the end will be saved*, but that is no reason to expose yourselves to danger; rather, *when they persecute you in one town, flee to another*. This is expedient for the weak, lest they fail by exposing themselves carelessly: "A wise man is cautious and turns away from evil, but a fool throws off restraint and is carless" (Pr 14:16). Likewise, it is for the perfect; and if not for their sake, then for the salvation of others, as it says in Philippians (1:24): "But to remain in the flesh is necessary for your sake." The Lord showed this when he fled into Egypt on account of Herod, as is recorded above (2:14). The apostles also did this, as in Acts (8:1). but John (10:12) seems not to agree with this: "The hireling flees and leaves the sheep." Therefore, it seems that this refers not to them but to hirelings. Augustine says that persecution threatens either one person, and then he should depart and leave others through whom salvation can be achieved; or it threatens the whole Church and then it is necessary for the entire Church to flee to safer places, as has already happened, or some should flee and other hold their ground, or the shepherd remain with his flock. He continues: *I say to you, you will not have gone through all the towns of Israel, before the Son of man comes*.

Then he answers a tacit objection, for they could say: You are sending us to Judea; if they chase us out, where shall we go? I say, granting that they expel you from one city, *flee to another*, and you will not be able to traverse the cities of Judea, *before the Son of man comes*, i.e., until he rises form the dead, and then he will send you to the gentiles, as it says below (28:19): "Go, teach all nations." Hilary explains it another way, namely, that he is speaking of the second mission, when he says, *when they persecute you...*, i.e., flee from the Jews to the gentiles, as it says in Acts (13:46): "It was necessary that the word of God be spoken first to you. since you thrust it form you and judge yourselves unworthy, behold we turn to the gentiles." Mystically in this way: When the heretics persecute you with their texts, refute them with texts; for they will not be finished, until the truth is manifested.

(24) *A disciple is not above his teacher [master]*. Here he urges them not to lose courage: first, by an example, secondly, by a favor (v. 26); thirdly, in view of the divine judgment (v. 28)

First, by an example he exhorts them not to lose courage; secondly, he applies it to his instruction.

First, he makes a comparison; secondly, what suffices for perfection (v. 25).

He says, therefore, *a disciple is not above his master*. For they could say: You say that we will be hated by all men; how can we endure so many hatreds. The Lord had given them great wisdom and great power; hence honor is owed to wisdom and reverence to power. Therefore, the Lord gives himself as an example of both. *The disciple*, as disciple, *is not above his master*; hence if they have not rendered me the honor due a master, then not to you. Again, *a servant is not above his lord*, and this is regard to his dominion. Hence John (13:13): "You call me master and lord, and you say well, for so I am."

(25) But one deserves glory, if he is as his master or lord; therefore, he adds, *it is enough for the disciple to be like his master*. For as in nature a thing is perfect, when it can produce another like itself, so one is a perfect disciple, when he is most like his master; similarly, for a servant. Therefore, it should not be burdensome to you, if you are as I am; hence it says in 1 Peter (2:1): "Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example to follow in his footsteps."

Then he calls them members of his household: *If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more will they malign those of his household?* He calls them members of the household for greater intimacy; hence it is a great gift to suffer for Christ, as it says in James (1:2): "Count it all joy, my brethren, when you meet various trials, for you know that the testing of your faith produces patience," and in Acts (5:41): "Then they left the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the name of Jesus." Hence it is not extraordinary for a member of a household to suffer for a friend: "You are fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God" (Eph 2:19). Hence *if they call the master of the house Beelzebub*, it is not strange, if they say insulting things to you. What is Beelzebub? It should be noted that Ninus is named the son of Bel; hence he made the image of his father be honored and called it Bel. Later it was translated into another language and called Beelzebub. Zebub means fly; for the sacrifice to him involved much blood where many flies gathered.

(26) *So have no fear of them...* Here he exhorts them not to give in to tribulations. First, he strengthens them; secondly, he mentions a comparison; thirdly, he applies it to his purpose. He says, therefore, "they will persecute you," but have no fear, because you should fear evil only; but it is a great good to bear what the Lord has borne. Hence Paul to the Galatians (6:17): "I bear on my body the marks of Jesus." *Nothing is covered that will not be revealed*. This can be referred to the preceding or to what follows. To the preceding thus: they will call you Beelzebub; but you should not worry, because in the end their malice will be revealed. Therefore, have no fear, because *nothing is covered that will not be revealed*, as it says in 1 Corinthians (4:5): "Therefore, do not judge before the time, until the Lord comes, who will reveal the hidden things of darkness and will manifest the counsels of hearts." *And hidden*, which differs from covered. For the hidden is something not manifest, as what one has in his heart, according to what was said above (9:4): "Why do you think evil in your hearts?" Something covered, however, is that which, although manifest, is concealed by something else. Or it can be explained thus: have not fear, because if your truth is not evident at once, it will be clear later.

(27) Then the Lord instructs them as an advocate is instructed, because he is first taught how to present proof, before making it known to others. Thus, the Lord had chosen disciples to spread his word to all people; therefore, he chose to teach them first in secret, saying, *what I tell you in the darkness, utter in the light*. There are two senses involved in a disciple's learning, namely, hearing and sight. What is said in the darkness is hidden; in like manner, what is heard by the ear. *What I tell you in the dark, utter in the light*, because in the light all things are made manifest. Again, that is hidden which is heard by the ear; therefore, he says, *what you hear whispered, proclaim upon the housetops*. But opposed to this is something in John (18:20): "I have spoken nothing in secret." But this must be understood in the following way: in secret I have spoken nothing that could not have been spoken publicly. Or in this way: *what I tell you in the dark*, i.e., among the Jews, who are darkness: "At one time you were darkness" (Eph 5:8). Or, what I say to you, who are darkness, *utter in the light*: "He will bring to light the things now hidden in darkness, and will disclose the purposes of the heart" (1 Cor 4:5). *And what you hear whispered, preach upon the housetops*: "Wise men hide their knowledge" (Pr 10:14); "What has been heard, explore with the mind" (Jb 5:27). *On the rooftops*, because in some regions the roofs were flat, so that even there manifestation can be made to all. Mystically, one preaches *on the rooftops*, when, subjecting the flesh to himself, he preaches to others.

(28) And *do not fear those who kill the body*. Above he showed that they should not depart from confessing the truth both by reason of an example and by reason of the reward. Here he shows that they should not depart by reason of God's judgment, because deeds are subject to divine justice. Or it can be connected in another way. He taught how persecutions are to be avoided; here he teaches that they should not cease performing their office on some account. But three things could prevent them: dishonor, fear of death and personal affection.

Therefore, he taught that they should not cease because of dishonor; here, not because of the fear of death; finally, not because of personal affection (v. 34).

Hence according to this he first teaches them not to fear those who kill the body, lest the preaching of the truth be forsaken; secondly, they are not to be feared, because they can do little harm; thirdly, he shows who should be feared, because he can do much.

First, therefore, he says, *do not fear those who kill the body*. And why? Because the body is destined to die; therefore, he is not doing anything that will not happen anyhow: "If Christ is in you, your body is indeed dead on account of sin" (Rom 7:10). Also because the killing of the body for the sake of glory is desirable: "Who will free me from the body of this death?" (Rom 7:24). Again, because it is brief and momentary: "For we who are living are always being delivered up to death" (2 Cor 4:11). And so, *do not fear*: "Who are you that you are afraid of man who dies, of the son of man who withers like grass?" (Is 51:12).

*But cannot kill the soul*. Here he shows that they can do little, because they cannot kill the soul; hence the spirit always lives: "Before a man are life and death, and whichever he chooses will be given to him" (Sir 15:17). For as the body lives in virtue of the soul, so the soul in virtue of God; and so God is the life of the soul. Therefore, they are not to be feared, for they can do little. So *do not fear them; rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell [gehenna]*. If you say that those should be feared who kill the body, he is more to be feared who can even destroy the soul. Note that the word *gehenna*, as Jerome says, is not found in the Old Testament, but it is taken by the savior from Jeremiah (14:6) where it says: "The days are coming when this place shall no more be called the valley of the sons of Ennon but the valley of slaughter." Hence Ennon is the valley at the foot of the mountain in Jerusalem. It was very fertile and called the valley of Ennon [Hinnim]. But it happened that the place was consecrated to an idol; and so, because the inhabitants turned to pleasures, the Lord threatened to kill them and the place would not be called Ennon but corander, i.e., the tomb of the dead.

Hence he says, Do not fear those only who kill the body; *rather fear him who can destroy both body and soul in gehenna*, because God is not to be served through fear of punishment but through love of justice, as it says in Romans (8:15): "You did not receive the spirit of slavery to fall back into sin, but you received the spirit of sonship" And note that he excludes two errors. For some said that when the body dies, the soul perishes; he rejects this when he says, *who can destroy [send] the soul into gehenna.* Hence it is clear that it continues after the body. It was also the opinion of some that there would not be a resurrection, as it says in 1 Corinthians (15:12). He excludes this, because if both body and soul are sent into gehenna, it is obvious that there will be a resurrection; and this is obtained from Rev (20:9): "In the resurrection they will be thrown into the lake of fire and brimstone."

(29) *Are not two sparrows sold for a penny?* It has already been stated that they are not to be feared, because they cannot... Again, if they are not to be feared, because the little they can do cannot be done without divine providence. First, he shows divine providence over the birds of the air; secondly, over men (v. 30); thirdly, he inculcates security (v. 31).

He says, therefore, *Are not two sparrows...* By sparrows he gives us to understand small birds, *sold for a penny?* In this he notes their low value, because, as one is the smallest number, so a penny the smallest coin. But note, according to Augustine, that something is said to be valuable in two ways: either according to the order of nature, and then one sparrow is more valuable than a denarius; or according to our use, and then a denarius is more valuable. But it is objected that Luke (12:6) says five sparrows and two pennies. The answer is that the difference is small: if two are soled for a penny and five for two pennies, there is only a slight difference. *And not one of them will fall to the ground without your father*, i.e., without his providence. Why does he say this Because it agrees with the word of the Law (Lev c. 14) that when anyone is cured of leprosy, he offered two sparrows. One was immolated, but the other was dipped with cedar wood and hyssop in the blood of the bird that was killed; later the living bird was set free. He wills, therefore, that two be accepted and one not killed; and this is not done without God's providence. Hilary explains it this way: "By the two sparrows are understood the body and the soul, and they are surrendered for a penny, i.e., for a slight pleasure: 'Behold, for your iniquities you were sold and for your transgressions your mother was put away' (Is 50:1). And only one of them falls to the earth, namely, the body, but the soul moves to judgment." But it is written that God has no care for oxen; therefore, neither for sparrows. But it should be known that he provides for all creatures according to the mode of their nature; although among creatures is this diversity that some are naturally free and the rest not. The free creature has the power to do what he wills; the unfree does not have this power. Hence he provides for the rational creatures as free, but he provides for the rest as slave, just as the head of a household provides for the free in one way and for the slaves in another. For he provides for the free for their own sakes, for the slaves in as much as they are of use to the master and according as each is more capable of serving. In the same way divine mercy distributes to the rational creatures for their own sake, because all is done on account of their good or of their evil. Hence all things are reward or punishments for them in view of their merits. But everything done for the irrational creature is either for man's welfare or for the completeness of the universe, as it says in 1 Kings (c. 13) that a certain prophet was killed by a lion, and this on account of his guilt. As a mouse is killed by a cat to preserve the good of the universe; for this is the order of the universe, that one animal lives off another.

(30) Then he shows that care for men is different from that for brutes; hence he says, *even the hairs of hour head are all numbered*. He shows that God's providence varies, in as much as he provides in diverse ways. For he had said about sparrows that not one falls to the ground without the Father; but here he says that not only you will not fall but not even the hairs of your head. And here he points out the providence over the slightest acts, because everything in them is ordained to them, and the Lord makes provision for them. but it should be noted that he says, *are numbered*. The reason is that it is customary for a person to count things he wishes to keep; whatever he wishes to dispose of he gives to someone. Hence this is the difference between providence over rational creatures and others, that the former are immediately ordained to God but the others not. Again, what we count we wish to keep for ourselves; therefore, he did not say that the sparrows are counted, because they will not exist forever. But there is a question here: If the hairs are numbered, will they not all be restored in the resurrection, even those that have been cut off? If so, the length will be unsightly. Some say that the matter will not perish, but that what is superfluous in one section will be transferred to another section. But if no hair has been lost, what then?

Here are three opinions: Some say that nothing will be resurrected except what pertains to the truth of human nature. Others say that only what has been cut off by Adam will rise, for his grew so much. But others say that not only what was cut off by Adam but also by our own immediate parent. Hence whatever is added, if it is truly human, will rise; but whatever does not pertain to the quantity of the parts will not rise. but against this it seems that heat acting on something moist and nourishing acts also on the root, and so a man does not consume one without the other, since they are mixed together. Therefore, it seems that a different answer must be given, namely, that whatever is of the truth will remain only in so far as it pertains to completeness. But by the truth of human nature I mean what is specifically flesh; but the other, materially flesh. The flesh will rise as to its species, though not according to matter. But what is meant by flesh according to its species? I answer that man's parts can be considered either as to form or as to matter: as to form he remains always; but if we consider the matter removed, something is lost and then replenished, as happens in fire. So if logs are added to fire, the fire remains the same specifically; yet there was matter according to the removal of the logs. Hence the more perfect will rise. Consequently, he does not say, "your hair is weighed," but *numbered*. Therefore, they will rise not in weight but in number. *Fear not, therefore...*

(31) Here he assures them on the ground that they can do little, and what they can do, they cannot accomplish without God's providence. *Fear not, therefore, you are of more value than many sparrows*: "You have put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, and also the beasts of the field" (Ps 8:6); and Genesis (1:26): "Let us make man to our image and likeness; and let him have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, and over the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth."

(32) *So everyone who acknowledges me before men I will acknowledge before my Father*. Here he touches on the advantage which accrues from acknowledging him; secondly, the loss which comes from denying him (v. 33).

He says, therefore: Thus I will that you suffer and die. Why? Certainly for your benefit, *because he that acknowledges me before men*... And he crushes the error of the one who said that it is not necessary to confess the faith except before God in the heart but not with the tongue before men. This is false, because "one believes with the heart unto righteousness, but confession is made with the mouth unto salvation" (Rom 10:4). *I will acknowledge him before my Father*, namely, when I shall have access to the Father, when it will be said: "Come, you blessed of my Father..." (Mt 25:34). But they could say: You are on earth, so this has little value; therefore, he adds, *who is in heaven*, and he has power.

(33) *But whoever denies me before men* in word, as Peter, or in action, as those of whom it says in Titus (1:16):"Some profess with their mouth that they know God, but in their deeds they deny him." *I also will deny them*, when he will say, as above (7:23): "I have never known you," i.e., I have never approved you.

(34) *Do not think I have come to bring peace on earth...* Above he urged the disciples not to abandon preaching the truth either on account of reproaches or fear of death. Here he urges that they not cease even on account of personal attachment. First, he shows that the separation from personal attachment is close at hand for them; secondly, how they should act in this matter (v. 37). In regard to the first he does three things: first, he excludes a supposed intention; secondly, he proposes his own plan (v. 34b); thirdly, he explains (v. 35).

He says, therefore: They could think thus: Why is it, Lord, that so many things will happen to us? With your coming we believed that we would have peace. Therefore, he says, *Do no thing...* But what is he saying? Is it not recorded in Luke (2:14) that at the Lords' birth the angels sang, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good will"? And the first time the bishop turns toward the people he says, "Peace be to you," and above the Lord announced peace. So it must be said that there are two kinds of peace, namely, good and bad. By the word "peace" is signified concord. There is evil peace, about which Wisdom (14:22) says: "They live in great strife due to ignorance, and they call such great evils peace." That is the peace of personal affections. I have not come to bring such peace; hence Revelation (6:4): "Its ride was permitted to take peace from the earth." There is also a good peace, about which Ephesians (2:14) says: "He is our peace who made both one"; wherefore, the angels said: "And on earth peace to men of good will. Therefore, *I have not come to bring peace but a sword*. It is the function of a sword to divide. This sword is the word of God: "The word of God is living and efficacious, and more piercing than a two-edged sword" (Heb 4:12). Hence, too: "The sword of the spirit, which is the word of God" (Eph 6:17). That sword was brought to this earth. Some believed and some did not. Consequently, a war takes place, as it says in Galatians (4:9): "How are you turned again to the weak and needy elements, which you want to serve again...?" Hence he came to separate that division. Therefore, he came to bring a sword..., i.e., the word, but partly; because some believed, and this came from him, and some did not, and this was from their own wickedness. Yet this, too, is caused by him, because he permits it, as it says in Romans (1:26); "For this reason God gave them over to their wicked desires."

(35) But someone could say: You have come to separate. Between whom have you come? Was it not between distant persons and strangers? He shows that it was not, but between those most closely united. *For*, he says, *I have come to set a man against his father...* For the closest union is twofold: one is the natural union; the other, domestic, or of the household; therefore, he brings a a word against both. Natural friendship is based on a natural act, which is generation, or the union of man and wife; domestic or household, on kinship. Against the first, therefore, I have come to separate a man from his father.

But there is a question. It was stated above, "I have come not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it." But the Law commands that one honor his father... I answer that you are obliged to obey him, when it does not draw one from the love of God; but when it does draw one away, you are not bound to obey. *And a daughter against a mother*; and this is in regard to generation. *And a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law*. And in this the New Law shares with the Old, as it is recorded in Exodus (32:26): "Whoever is on the Lord's side, come to me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together to him. And he said to them: 'Put every man his sword on his side..., and let him slay his brother and friend.'" And this was regarded as worthy of praise for the Levites, as it says in Deuteronomy (33:8): "Of Levi he said, 'Your perfection and doctrine from your holy man,'" and he continues: "He said to his father and mother, 'I regard them not'; he disavowed his brothers and ignored his children." But a question arises: Why does he list six persons, whereas Luke (12:53) lists only three? The answer is that it is the same in both accounts, because one's mother is mother-in-law of his wife.

(36) Likewise he mentions those who pertain to the household, where he says, *and a man's enemies will be those of his own household*. And it says in Jeremiah (20:10): "For I hear many whisperings. Terror is on every side. 'Denounce him! Let us denounce him!' say all my familiar friends who were at peace with me." And notice that it is all in Micah (7:6): "The son treats the father with contempt, the daughter rises up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; a man's enemies are the men of his own house."

(37) *He who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me*. Here he shows how they should conduct themselves in that division. If you wish to receive the Lord's sword, it is important that you be separated form those he mentioned. But someone will say: I do not want to be separated from my father and those others; therefore, he says, *He who loves father and mother more than me is not worthy of me*. The Lord's exhortation is that he be preferred to all familial love: first, he gives the exhortation; secondly, the advantage it brings (v. 40). And he mentions three degrees. For it is natural that a man love his father, but more natural that a father love his son; also it is much more natural that he love himself. Why then does a father love his son more, and not the son love the father more?

Some give the reason that the father knows more about the son, if he is a son, than the son about the father. Also, the longer one clings to another, the more firmly established becomes the love.
Another reason is that everyone loves himself more than someone else. But a son is a certain part separated from the father, whereas the father is not part of the son. Therefore,...
Moreover it is natural for everyone to love what he has produced. But according to some there is a difference, because in some matters the son loves the father more; for the son's descent from the father is by nature, yet the son is by nature subject to the father; therefore, the father naturally loves the son, even a spiritual father, as it says in 1 Corinthians (4:14): "I do not write this to shame you, but to admonish you as my beloved children."

But sons are naturally subject to the father; therefore, they naturally honor the father and become more angry at an injury inflicted on their father than on themselves, and they desire their father's glory more than their own: "The glory of sons is their fathers" (Pr 17:6). Hence *he who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me*, because he is God who must be loved above all else: "I will not show partiality to any person or use flattery toward any man" (Jb 32:21). For God is goodness itself; therefore, he must be loved more. Therefore, he is not worthy of me who loves father or mother more than me. And *he who loves son or daughter more than me...* Why does a son love his father? Because whatever the son has is from the father, for he has nourishment and teaching from his father. And the son cannot give this to the father; but what the son receives from the father he receives in greater abundance from God. For he also teaches us, as it says in Job (35:11): "Who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the birds of the air." He also feeds us, as is said of Jacob in Genesis. Again, he preserves us forever. And a man gets this more from God than a son from his father. Therefore, God must always be loved more: "I know that my redeemer lives, and at the last he will raise me from the earth, and I shall again be surrounded by my skin and in my flesh I will see God" (Jb 19:25).


## 10—2

Mt 10:38-42


> 38. And he that taketh not up his cross, and followeth me, is not worthy of me. 39. He that findeth his life, shall lose it: and he that shall lose his life for me, shall find it. 40. He that receiveth you, receiveth me: and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me. 41. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive the reward of a prophet: and he that receiveth a just man in the name of a just man, shall receive the reward of a just man. 42. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, amen I say to you he shall not lose his reward.

(38) *And he who does not take his cross...* It has been said that one who loves father..., but I say more: he that loves himself more than me is not worthy of me, because nothing can fill one's whole affection but God. Therefore, Deuteronomy (6:5): "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength." Hence he says, *he who does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me*. This tells us that one who is not prepared to suffer even death for the truth, and that worst of deaths, namely, the death of the cross, *is not worthy of me*. Indeed, he should even glory in the cross, as Paul: "Far be it from me to glory except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ" (Gal 6:14). In these words Christ foretells his own death: "Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example to follow in his footsteps" (1 Pt 2:21). It is also explained another way, namely, that one who afflicts his flesh takes the cross, as is said in Galatians (5:24): "Those who belong to Christ crucify their flesh with its vices and desires." Again, the cross is carried in the heart, when one grieves over sin, as the Apostle said: "Who is scandalized, and I am not on fire?" Finally, all this is not enough, unless one follows the Lord. Hence, *and follows me*. If you fast, if you sympathize with your neighbor, but not for my sake, *you are not worthy of me*. For it is a great thing to follow the Lord, as it says in Sirach (33:8): "It is a great glory to follow the Lord."

(39) But they could say: What shall we get from all this? So he shows them the punishment for those who do not obey; hence he says, *He who finds his life [soul] shall lose it*. Soul is taken for life. When one is in danger of losing his money, he says: I have lost my money; and if he is freed from danger, he says that he has found his money. In like manner if one is in bodily danger and is freed by some chance, he says that he has found his life. Therefore, one who finds his life and was in danger on my account and denies me to find his life, is not worthy of me. *And he who loses his soul*, i.e., life, i.e., if he exposes himself to death for my sake, *will find it*: "He that finds me shall find life and will draw salvation from the Lord" (Pr 8:35).

(40) *He who receives you, receives me*. Here he offers a remedy. You say that we should do all this. How are we going to live? Favor us. As the Pope gives his representatives the power to grant favors, so the Lord gives a reward to those who receive them. And he mentions three. He says, therefore, *he who receives you, receives me*, because they will have God, because you are my members, because member of a member. But they could say: there is nothing great in receiving a poor man or you. But on the other hand, *he that receives me, receives him that sent me*, because,as it says in John (5:23): "He that honors my Father, honors me." It is no small thing to have God as a gift, as it was imputed to the praise of Abraham (Heb 13:2).

(41) Furthermore, something else will follow, namely, the reward of a prophet. Hence *he who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward*. There are two outstanding qualities in a prophet, namely, prophecy: "I will pour out my spirit on all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy" (Jl 3:28); and the gift of justice: "Whom god made our wisdom and justice" (1 Cor 1:30). *He who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet* can be taken to mean *he who receives a prophet* in as much as he is a prophet, *will receive the reward of a prophet*. Or in another way: You say that we should receive the apostles, but some pseudo-apostles or pseudo-prophets will come. Therefore, he says: I am emphasizing not their reality but their name, because one who receives him in the name of a prophet, will have a reward. And which reward? The same as you would have if you received a true prophet. Furthermore, he makes no distinction about who he is, whether the one or the other. For he who receives a prophet, receives the reward of a prophet, because a prophet is thereby more inclined to do his work; for not only those who do, receive a reward, "but even those who consent to those doing it," as it says in Romans (1:32). Hence if you work together with a good one, you will receive a reward from that good one; if you minister the necessities of life, you receive a reward, because otherwise he could not fulfill his office. What follows is the same: *He who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man*, or Elijah, I would be glad to receive him.

(39) Therefore, he adds, *and whoever gives to one of these little ones*, i.e., to believers, as it says below (25:40): "Amen I say to you, as long as you did it to one of these, my least brethren, you did it to me"; as if to say: I do not car whether they were great or small. Someone could say: I am poor; I have nothing to give. So he adds, *a cup of water*. He does not say, "hot water" on account of a lack of word, so that he could not have an excuse. Hence he wants to say: the slightest thing you do will have its reward. And he confirms this, saying, *Amen, I say to you, he shall not lose his reward*; Is (40:10): "Behold, the Lord comes..., and his reward is with him, and his recompense before him."
