# Chapter 12

> 1. At that time Jesus went through the corn on the sabbath: and his disciples being hungry, began to pluck the ears, and to eat. 2. And the Pharisees seeing them, said to him: Behold thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days. 3. But he said to them: Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, and they that were with him: 4. How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the loaves of proposition, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for them that were with him, but for the priests only? 5. Or have ye not read in the law, that on the sabbath days the priests in the temple break the sabbath, and are without blame? 6. But I tell you that there is here a greater than the temple. 7. And if you knew what this meaneth: I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: you would never have condemned the innocent. 8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath. 9. And when he had passed from thence, he came into their synagogues. 10. And behold there was a man who had a withered hand, and they asked him, saying: Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they might accuse him. 11. But he said to them: What man shall there be among you, that hath one sheep: and if the same fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not take hold on it and lift it up? 12. How much better is a man than a sheep? Therefore it is lawful to do a good deed on the sabbath days. 13. Then he saith to the man: Stretch forth thy hand; and he stretched it forth, and it was restored to health even as the other. 14. And the Pharisees going out made a consultation against him, how they might destroy him. 15. But Jesus knowing it, retired from thence: and many followed him, and he healed them all. 16. And he charged them that they should not make him known. 17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the prophet, saying: 18. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul hath been well pleased. I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles. 19. He shall not contend, nor cry out, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets. 20. The bruised reed he shall not break: and smoking flax he shall not extinguish: till he send forth judgment unto victory. 21. And in his name the Gentiles shall hope.

Above in chapter 11 your have heard how the Lord satisfied John's disciples and upbraided other. Here he shows how the Pharisees were handled. He does two things: first, he shows how he answers the Pharisees; secondly, how the disciples are commended (v. 16).

In regard to the first he does two things: first, he shows how those vilifying the disciples are answered; secondly, those vilifying Christ (v. 9).

In regard to the first: first, the occasion for reproving is depicted; secondly, the reproof (v. 2); thirdly, Christ's defense (v. 3).

Two occasions are given: one on the part of Christ, the other on the part of the disciples (v. 1b).

(1) On the part of Christ he says, *At that time Jesus went through the grain fields on the Sabbath*. Jesus knew that the disciples would do this, yet the Lord willed that it occur that he might now begin to abolish the Sabbath, as it says above (11:13): "The Law and the prophets prophesied until John." But it should be noted that it says, *at that time*; consequently, it seems that the order of history is being followed. But Luke (6:1) and Mark (2:23) give another sequence. Here it is put after the Lord's answer to John's disciples; hence it seems that all the preceding events occurred before John's death, but this one after. This is clear form the historical continuity of all the events recorded up to c. 14, where the details of John's death are given. Therefore, we must suppose that as John's death drew near, he sent his disciples; after that he was beheaded, and these things happened after his death.

*Jesus went through the grain fields on the Sabbath*. By these grain fields are understood the sacred letters. The sower is Christ (below 13:37): "It is he who sows." Also the people who believe.

*The disciples were hungry, and they began to pluck the ears of grain*. Here two things should be considered: first, the need, because they were hungry. And why? Because they were poor; hence 1 Corinthians (4:4): "Even to this hour we hunger and thirst..." The second reason is that they had been impeded on account of the crowds; hence they hardly had time to eat, as it says in Mark (4:31). But how did they satisfy their hunger? And example of abstinence is given to us, for they did not look for dishes of food but grains, in keeping with 1 Timothy (6:8): "If we have food and clothing, with these we are content." Mystically by the plucking of the grains is understood the manifold understanding of Scripture or the conversion of sinners.

(2) Then he presents the rebuke against the Pharisees. *But when the Pharisees saw it, they said to him: "Look, your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath."* The disciples were doing two things: first, they plucked someone else's grain; secondly, the y were violating the Sabbath. But the Pharisees did not complain about the first, because it was permitted by the Law (Dt c. 23); therefore, because it was permitted, they were not stopped; but because it was on the Sabbath, they were judged maliciously. And by this is destroyed the heresy of the Hebrews who taught that the legal observances must be kept intact along with the gospel. And because Paul is opposed to this teaching, they rebuked Paul. Against them Jerome argues that even the disciples did not observe them.

(3-4) *He said to them...* Here the justification is given: first, with certain examples; secondly, with a text of Scripture (v. 7).

In regard to the first he does two things: first, he gives an example, in which some were excused on account of necessity; secondly, in which some were excused on account of holiness (v. 5).

He says, therefore, *He said to them...* In Leviticus (24:5) it is read that twelve loaves were baked from fine flour and placed on the table of proposition on the Sabbath, and on another Sabbath they were removed and others put there, and the first ones were eaten by the sons of Aaron. Then in 1 Samuel (21:6) it is written that when David was fleeing from Saul, Ahimelech divided those loaves among them. This is why he says, *Have you not read what David did, when he was hungry, and those who were with him*. For David was a good man, of whom the Lord says that he has found a man according to his own heart (1 Sam 13:8). But someone might say that David was a prophet and so was allowed to take them. Therefore, he adds, *and those who were with him*. The loaves of proposition were the ones offered on the Sabbath and it was not lawful according to the precept to eat them (Lev 24:5). But what does this have to do with the case? Because it was the Sabbath, when he did this. And this is clear, because he said, "I have no bread except what I took form the Lord's table," and he did this only on the Sabbath. Likewise on the first day of the month was the feast of the new moon; therefore, if it happened on the Sabbath, it was violated by necessity. But it still seems that he did not violate it, because it is not a sin to eat on the Sabbath. However, Chrysostom says that he violated more than the Sabbath, because he took loaves, which were not lawful for anyone to use, out of necessity. Likewise, it should be noted that according to Chrysostom some precepts are such that they are commanded for their own sake, and these cannot be broken for any need; but some are not for their own sake but for the sake of a figure, and these can be broken at certain times and places: as a fast can now be broken out of necessity. But that bread was the figure of another bread, namely, the bread of the altar, which is received not only by the priest but by the people; therefore, David was the figure of that people. Hence Revelation (5:10): "You have made us a kingdom and priests to our God."

(5) Then another example is given, namely, based on holiness, when he says, *Have you not read in the Law how on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and are guiltless?* In Leviticus it was commanded that the offering customary on other days be doubled on the Sabbath; yet it was done in the temple and on the Sabbath, because it was done out of deference to the temple and to God; hence the priests were excused. The example is cited, because the apostles were dedicated to one greater than the temple, namely, to Christ. Hence he said: *Have you not read in the Law how the priests profaned the Sabbath?* unless it was for the sake of the temple.

(6) *tell you this, that something greater than the temple is here*. That something greater than the temple is here is clear, because his body is a temple. Likewise it should be noted that in the first example he does not claim that it is without sin. In the second he states that if one breaks the Sabbath out of necessity, it is not on that account entirely free of sin; but it is, if it is done on account of God.

(7) Then he argues from the example: first, because his disciples should be dealt with mercifully; *because if you had known what this means, 'I desire mercy and not sacrifice,' you would not have condemned the guiltless* (Hose 6:6). How this is to be understood has been stated above. "To do mercy and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice" (pr 21:3).

(8) There is another argument which makes them innocent, namely, obedience; hence they can do these things, because he ordered them, *for the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath*, and the lawgiver is not subject to he law: "He is our lawgiver" (Is 33:22); therefore, he has the power, because h has the authority.

(9) *And he went on from there, and entered their synagogue*. Above he described how the Lord answered the Pharisees for complaining about the disciples; here, how he answered their attack. For they oppose him, first, by laying snares; secondly, by detracting; thirdly, by testing. Accordingly, he response in three ways: the second is at v. 22, the third at v. 35.

In regard to the first he does two things; first, he shows how they plotted against his teaching; secondly, against his life (v. 14).

In regard to the first are done two things: first, their crafty questioning is described; secondly, Christ's answer (v. 11).

Regarding the first he does three things: first, the place is described; secondly the occasion (v. 10). thirdly, the question (v. 10b).

He says, therefore, *He went on from there and entered their synagogue*. According to the letter the disciples plucked the grain and Jesus defended them. Hence when he says, *and he went on from there*, it seems that they went on from there the same day. But this is excluded by Luke (6:1), because it was another Sabbath; consequently, this is to be understood as following immediately. Hence he says that *he entered their synagogue* to preach salvation, as in John (18:20): "I have always taught in the temple and in the synagogue, where all the Jews gather, and in secret I have spoken nothing." And in Ps 40 (v. 9): "I have taught the glad news of your justice to the great congregation."

(10) *And behold there was a man with a withered hand*. This was the occasion for the questioning, for *they asked him*. It is said that he was a mason and had a withered hand. By him is signified the human race, whose hand was withered by original sin; or every sinner, whose hand and functioning powers have withered; and sometimes the right hand, because they are not capable of doing good, although they are strong in evil. He says, therefore, *They asked him, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?"* They saw a man with power; therefore they asked if it is lawful to cure on the Sabbath. And they asked this to test him: "He will test you through much talk" (Sir 13:9). They asked not with a desire to learn but to accuse: "They speak peace with their neighbors, while mischief is in their hearts" (Ps 28:3). But there is a question, because Mark (3:4) says that the Lord asked, but here that they asked. Augustine answers that both asked, because when he stood in the midst and asked to be healed, they asked; but when the Lord made him rise, he asked. Or another way: they were watching him and were preparing themselves to ask; then he asked, because he knew that they asked in order to accuse him.

(11) *He said to them...* Here the answer is given: first, he answers in words; secondly, in deed (v. 13).

In the first he does three things: first, he reminds them of a custom; secondly, he makes a comparison (v. 12); thirdly, he draws the conclusion (v. 12b).

He says, therefore, *What man of you, if he has one sheep and it falls into a pit on the Sabbath will not lay hold of it and lift it out?* It was their custom that if a sheep fell into a pit, they would lift it out on the Sabbath; for they were so greedy, that they considered temporal damage worse than spiritual damage. Hence the words of Sirach (10:9): "Nothing is more heinous than a greedy man: applies to them. And later on he says: "For he has a venal soul," because ht exposes himself to danger and eternal damnation for a slight temporal profit.

(12) Secondly, the comparison is made: *Of how much more value is a man than a sheep!* Incomparably, because all things are for man; for dominion over all things has been entrusted to man, as it says in Genesis (1:26): "Let us make man to our own image and likeness..., and let him have dominion over the fish of the sea, and the birds of the air, and the beasts of the earth." Consequently, what was made to the image of God is preferred to a sheep. From this he concludes: *So it is lawful to cure on the Sabbath*, i.e., to do good to men: "Cease to do evil, learn to do good" (Is 1:16), because it is written in Exodus (20:10): "You shall do not servile work on that day." Servile work is sinful; therefore, it is lawful to do good. But then there is a question: Is it lawful to do all good works on the Sabbath? For then it is lawful to plow. Therefore, it must be said that servile work can be understood literally, and mystically servile work is sin: "he that commits sin is the slave of sin: (Jn 8:34). Again, servile work is that in which the body is employed more than the mind. For the soul is supposed to rule the body. Therefore, to take counsel is not a servile work. Hence we can see which things are excused from the Sabbath. For the Lord excuses the disciples by reason of need; hence necessity excuses. Likewise, things which are immediately directed to the worship of God, as to swing a censer, etc. Also things pertaining to bodily health, as to concoct medicine, salve, etc. Hence they are rebuked, because they narrowed a precept of the Law.

(13) *Then he said to the man, "Stretch out your hand."* Here he answers them with a deed, namely, curing him; for he would not have cured him, if it were not lawful. The cure follows: *it was restored, whole like the other*. Mystically, a man with a withered hand, i.e., incapable of doing good, has no better cure than to extend his hand to help the poor. Hence Daniel (4:27): "Break off your sins by showing mercy to the oppressed:; "Water extinguishes a blazing fire; so almsgiving atones for sins" (Sir 3:30); "Let not our hand be open for receiving and closed for giving" (Sir 18:36). And note that first he had the left hand healthy, and the other, namely, the right was restored. And this is so, because men are first capable of evil:"Woe to you who are strong for doing evil" (Is 5:22); but after they are healed by grace, they are inclined to do good: "As you once yielded your members to impurity and to greater and greater iniquity, so now yield your members to righteousness for justification" (Rom 6:19).

(14) *But the Pharisees went away*, namely, from the synagogue, in fulfillment of Psalm 54(v. 3): "The synagogue of powerful men has risen against me." They went away, therefore, to do evil, as it says in Job (1:12): "So Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord." *And took counsel*, i.e., how they might destroy and kill him, because they were unable to overcome him by words: "Blessed is the man who has not gone aside in the counsel of the wicked" (Ps 1:1).

(15) *Jesus, aware of this, withdrew from there*. Here he states how he escaped their snare: first, the departure is mentioned; secondly, the fruit. Why did he depart? Because it was not yet the time to suffer. He also departed in order to give his own the occasion for fleeing, as was stated above (c. 10). Likewise, to show that he was man; and in order not to incite them. For it is the sign of a good preacher that when he sees men moved and excited, he dismisses them, as it says in Sirach (8:13): "Do not kindle the coals of a sinner, lest you be burned in his flaming fire." *And many followed him*; hence he came to those who loved him and willingly listened to him: "My sheep hear my voice" (Jn 10:3). *And he healed them*: "For neither herb nor poultice cured them, but it was your word, O Lord, which heals all men" (Wis 16:12); "He sent forth his word and healed them: (Ps 107:20).

(16) How? *He ordered them not to make him known*. Why? In order to give us an example to avoid human glory, as it says above (6:1), and to spare the Pharisees, who were slandering him for his actions.

(17) *This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah*. Here he cites a text from Isaiah (42:1). And it should be noted that some apostles cite texts according to the Hebrew version, some according to the Septuagint, and some merely expressed the sense of the words. And he does three things. First he describes the human nature, when he says, *Behold, my servant [boy]*,because he was a boy: "The boy Jesus stayed behind in the temple" (Lk 2:43). He is also called a boy from his purity, because "He did not sin, nor was there found deceit in his mouth" (1 Pt 2:22). Or in the sense that a servant is called a boy; hence, *Behold the boy*, a servant in a servant's form: "He emptied himself, taking the form of a servant" (Phil 2:7). The chosen one, *whom I have chosen*. Not that in every holy man are three things: divine election [choice], love and the effect, which is grace. These are in man in one way, in God in another way. In man grace is first; then he loves, and after that he chooses. But in God is the converse, because mans will does not cause grace; its cause is God's love and will. Therefore, he first chooses whom he wills to be good; secondly, he loves; thirdly, he gives the grace.

(18) Hence, according to this he presents three things: first, the choice. He says, therefore, *Behold my servant whom I have chosen*, and this in regard to a twofold choice, which belongs to Christ according to his human nature. For he was chosen for two things, namely, to be Son of God: "who was predestinated son of God..." (Rom 1:4); "Blessed is he whom you chose and brought near" (Ps 64:4). Secondly, he was chosen for the work of human redemption: "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son..." (Jn 3:16). Likewise, he chose in order to love; hence it says, *my beloved*, for if he loves certain ones, he loves him with a special love: "For it is not by measure that the spirit was given to him" (Jn 3:34); hence he says, *with whom my soul*, i.e., my will, *is well pleased*. This is a special love, because the will is not at rest except where it finds something pleasing. But nothing is pleasing except through grace, and nothing pleasing was absent from Christ; hence above (3:17): "'This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

Then he mentions the conferring of grace: *I will put my spirit upon him*, as Joel (2:28) says: "I will pour out my spirit on all flesh." But in Christ he poured out not only form the Spirit but the whole Spirit, as it says in John (3:34): "For it is not by measure that the Spirit was given to him"; "The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him" (Is 11:2). And this, in as much as he has the form of a servant.

But what will he do? What office will he have? *He will proclaim judgment to the gentiles*, i.e., he will teach the gentiles God's judgments. Of old the Jews gloried in being God's special people; hence they said: "He has not dealt thus with any other nation; they do not know his judgments" (Ps 147:20). But that was said of the gentiles. Hence *he shall proclaim to the gentiles* materially, because he received the power to judge the gentiles: "He is the one ordained by God to be judge of the living and the dead" (Acts 10:42); "The Father has given all judgment to the Son" (Jn 5:22). But is he suitable, because in judging two things are required, namely, clemency and justice? And he showed both: first, that he has clemency. And because clemency can exist in words and in deeds, and some, even though incapable of doing anything, complain in words, he removes this from him.

(19) Hence he says, *he will not wrangle*; "When he was reviled, he did not revile" (1 Pt 2:23). And what i said in Proverbs (20:3) well suits him: "It is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife." Of course, some do not wrangle, but they murmur. But he will not do this, because *he will not cry aloud*. Hence Isaiah (53:7): "Like a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and like a sheep that before its shearers is dumb, he opened not his mouth." Crying aloud proceeds from emotion, and the Apostle commands the Ephesians (4:31): "Let all anger and clamor be put away from you." Some do not cry along, but they complain. This is taken away: *nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets*. Those who walk in the path of sinners make their voice heard in the streets: "The stones of the sanctuary lie scattered at the head of every street" (Lam 4:1); "Wisdom cries aloud in the street" (Pr 1:20). Yet he will not be heard among them. Or, in another way: by the stones is meant the gentiles, because they are outside the sanctuary. And although Christ willed to be preached to the gentiles, he himself did not preach to them in person. Hence he is not heard in the streets, i.e., among the gentiles. Thus, therefore, was he patient in word.

(20) And also in deed: *he will not break a bruised reed*. And this ins two ways: for it can be referred specifically to the Jews; secondly, in a general sense to all. In regard to the Jews there were two things in them, namely, a royal power and priestly dignity. Royal power is signified by the reed, which had already been broken, because they were subject to the Romans; therefore it was easy for him thus to break the reed. And the reed is a good comparison, because it is easily moved, as it says above (11:7): "What did you go out to the desert to see? A reed shaken by the wind?"

*Or quench a smoldering wick*. By the *smoldering* wick is signified the priesthood; hence a priest wears linen vestments. Also smoldering, for smoke is extinguished by fire. Again, smoke comes from a weak fire and dissipates rather than consumes; hence an offensive smell is produced. Therefore they were like a smoking wick, because they had not lost the faith completely; yet they did not have enough to restrain them from evils. Hence, although he could justly extinguish them, *he did not quench the smoldering wick*. Furthermore, it is explained in another way in regard to everyone, so that by the bruised reed are understood sinners. By the smoldering wick, which has a bit of heat, are understood those not in sin, but they are lukewarm toward good and have some grace. Hence he wants to say: He does not close the way of salvation to sinners; hence he says in Ezekiel (18:28): "Have I any pleasure in the death of the wicked?" Again, if a person has grace, he will not extinguish it. Hence in this is given an example that we should not extinguish but rather foster anyone's grace, which the Lord has given to him.

Furthermore, he will not pass judgment, *until he brings judgment to victory*. And this can be applied in particular to the Jews, namely, when he shall have overcome all, because they charged that he cast out devils by Beelzebub; and he refuted them and passed judgment on them. And this was fulfilled through Titus and Vespasian.

(21) And not only will that happen, but after their destruction *the gentiles will hope in his name*. Hence Genesis (49:10): "He will be the expected of the nations." Or another way: Thus he curbs his will, but when the enemy, death, is destroyed, all the gentiles will cling to him; and this will be on the day of judgment.


## 12—2

Mt 12:22-37


> 22. Then was offered to him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb: and he healed him, so that he spoke and saw. 23. And all the multitudes were amazed, and said: Is not this the son of David? 24. But the Pharisees hearing it, said: This man casteth not out devils but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils. 25. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom divided against itself shall be made desolate: and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand. 26. And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself: how then shall his kingdom stand? 27. And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore they shall be your judges. 28. But if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils, then is the kingdom of God come upon you. 29. Or how can any one enter into the house of the strong, and rifle his goods, unless he first bind the strong? and then he will rifle his house. 30. He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth. 31. Therefore I say to you: Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be forgiven. 32. And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but he that shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to come. 33. Either make the tree good and its fruit good: or make the tree evil, and its fruit evil. For by the fruit the tree is known. 34. O generation of vipers, how can you speak good things, whereas you are evil? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. 35. A good man out of a good treasure bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of an evil treasure bringeth forth evil things. 36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall render an account for it in the day of judgment. 37. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.

Above the Lord refuted those who slandered both his doctrine and life; here he answers those who malign his miracles. First, a miracle is described; secondly, the perversity of the detractors (v. 23); thirdly, their refutation (v. 25).

In regard to the miracle two things are presented: first, the manifold infirmity; secondly, the person cured (v. 22b).

(22) He says, therefore, *Then a blind and dumb demoniac was brought to him*. This person is described in other words by Luke (11:14). But it is not improper that something mentioned in one is left unsaid in another. By this person is signified the gentile's condition or the sinner, who has a demon in as much as he is a slave, because "one who sins is the slave of sin" (Jn 8:34). He is blind, i.e., deprived of the light of grace; hence (Is 59:10): "We grope for the wall like the blind; we grope like those who have no eyes." Furthermore, he is mute in confessing the faith: "I was dumb and blind" (Ps 39:2); "Because I kept silent, my bones grew old" (Ps 32:3).

Then the complete cure takes place: *and he healed him* by expelling the muteness, *so that the dumb man spoke*; by expelling the blindness *and he saw*. Hence perfect healing is conferred: "He forgives all your iniquities and heals all your diseases" (Ps 103:3). Therefore, he sent him away neither dumb nor blind.

(23) Then the effect of the miracle, namely, the amazement of the crowd: *and all the people were amazed*. Also their confession; hence *they said*, i.e., confessed, *Can this be the son of David?* It had been promised in the prophets that Christ would be born of the seed of David: "I will raise up for David a righteous branch" (Jer 23:5). But what was said above (11:25) seems fulfilled: "You have hid these things from the wise and prudent and revealed them to little ones." Hence the people acknowledge him.

(24) *But when the Pharisees heard it they said, "It is only by Beelzebub that this man casts out devils*. Beelzebub is the god of Ehron, as it says in 2 Kings (1:16). He is called the lord of flies on account of the foul rite of the blood sacrificed, by reason of which many flies gathered. Therefore, they believed that this demon was the prince of demons and, consequently, that by his power demons could be cast out: "I will go to the great and will speak of them:" (Jer 5:5) and a few words later "They all alike had broken the yoke, they had burst the bonds."

(25) *But Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said to them*. In this part Jesus refutes his detractors: first, he argues against their statements; secondly, against the detractors (v. 31).

He refutes their statements with four arguments, the second of which is at v. 26, the third at v. 26b, the fourth at v. 30.

The first is stated most aptly: *Every kingdom divided against itself is laid wast* e. First he states the major premise, when he says, *Every kingdom*... There are three kinds of community: the house or family, the city and the kingdom. The house is a community consisting of those by whom common actions are performed; therefore, it consists of a three-fold union, namely, of father and son, of husband and wife, of lord and servant. The civil community contains every necessity for a man's life; therefore, it is perfect as far as the merely necessary are concerned. The kingdom is a complete community. For where there would be fear of enemies, one city by itself could not subsist; therefore, because of the fear of enemies, there is need for a community of many cities which form one kingdom. Hence as life is to each man, so is peace to a kingdom; and as health is nothing more than the proper equilibrium of humors, so peace consists in each thing maintaining its order. And just as, when health is receding, a man is tending toward death, so with peace: if it departs from a kingdom, it tends to ruin. Hence the ultimate objective is peace. Therefore, the Philosopher says: as the doctor is to health, so the defender of the republic is to peace. Consequently, he says: *Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste*: "Their heart is divided; now they shall perish" (Hos 10:2); "The youth will be insolent to the elder, and the base fellow to the honorable" (Is 3:5).

(26) *If Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself*. Casting out implies violent motion; therefore, it is necessary that where there is contradiction there is division: "There are always quarrels between the proud" (Pr 13:10). But someone cold say that there was no casting out, because he went out voluntarily. But this has no force, because such a departure is not a casting out, but takes place by obeying someone commanding; hence this would be a voluntary departure. But that they depart involuntarily is apparent from what happened above, namely, they began to groan and shout [above 8:29]: "What have you to do with us, son of God? Have you come to torment us before the time?" Therefore, there is division.

*How then will his kingdom stand?* Jerome explains it thus: *How will his kingdom stand?* As if to say: The devil's kingdom stands in sinners until the day of judgment, because then all power will be removed. Hence if this were so, it would now be the end of the world. Rabanus, thus: *How will his kingdom stand?* Because if he is opposed, he is in danger; therefore, you should be wary of his kingdom. Hilary: *How will it stand?* As if to say: It is due to my power that I make it possible for one to expel another. Therefore, I destroy the devil's kingdom; and for this reason you should adhere to me.

(27) *If I cast out devils by Beelzebub*. Here the second reason is given. If I cast out, I do this either by the devil's power or by the power of the Holy Spirit; whichever of these it is, you should not slander me. First, he continues the first reason; secondly, the second (v. 28). He says, therefore, *If I cast out devils by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons cast them out?* Jerome explains this in two ways: In one way of exorcists, concerning whom it says in Acts (19:13) that certain exorcists cast out demons in the name of Jesus Christ. Hence *if I cast out devils by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons cast them out?* As if to say that their sons cast them out. Therefore, if you do not slander them, you should not slander me. Hence you are accepting persons. *Therefore they shall be your judges*. Because I cast them out by the power of God, they shall judge, just as below he says of the queen of the south that she will judge. Or it can be explained of the apostles. Your sons, i.e., the apostles. He calls them their sons and not disciples, so that they would be more predisposed toward them. Likewise to show that in belittling them, they attack themselves; because if your sons cast them out, you would do in like manner, if you prepared yourselves. Therefore, because they are aware that I do this by a power given to me and not by Beelzebub, they will be your judges, as it says below (19:28): "You will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

(28) *But if it is by the Spirit of God that I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you*. As if to say: He is a fool who rejects what would turn out for his good; but this, namely, to cast out devils, redounds to your good. From this, therefore, you can gather that it is by the Holy Spirit, because the finger of God is the Holy Spirit, as the Son is the hand. Nor is there any invoking, but it is done solely from authority. Hence *if it is by the Spirit of God that I cast out devils*... But why is the expulsion of devils attributed to the Holy Spirit? Because love and goodness are appropriated to him; therefore, to expel the devil befits no one so well as the person of the Holy Spirit. *The kingdom of God has come upon you*: (Lk 17:21): "The kingdom of God is within you." And you can know that it is done by Christ and this is to your benefit; therefore he says, upon you. Or another way: *The kingdom of God*, i.e., God's dominion over men: "For he must first reign until he has put all things under his feet" (1 Cor 15:25). Therefore if the demons are already beginning to be trod under foot, the kingdom and dominion of God has already arrived among you.

(29) *Or how can one enter a strong man's house?* Here is presented the third reason through which the Lord intends to refute the contentions of the Pharisees, and it is an argument taken from things that occur among men. For when someone is well defended in his own home, he cannot be ejected from it or his vessels plundered, unless a stronger man overcomes him. But Christ plunders the devil's vessels by casting him out from men in whom he exists as in his own property. Therefore Christ is stronger than he. And this reason he presents in those words. *Strong man*. This is the devil, who is called strong on account of his power: "No power can be compared to his" (Jb 41:24). And he is made stronger through consent, because one who consents gives him power over himself: "Every man will fight against his brother, city against city, and I will give over the Egyptians into the hand of cruel masters" (Is 41:24). The house is the world or the assemblage of sinners, not because he created the world, but because it obeys him by consenting; hence in John (12:31) he is called "the prince of this world." His vessels are men. Vessel is taken in two senses. A vessel of something is that which is filled with it, as a vessel of oil, because it is full of oil, or a vessel of water, because it is full of water; in this way some are vessels of the devil, because they are filled with the devil, either in regard to the body, as those obsessed by the devil; but in regard to the soul those whose hearts are in full accord with the devil's will, as is said of Judas Sometimes vessels are any instruments destined for any purpose whatever; hence whoever affords the occasion of sin to others is called the devil's vessel. But no matter the sense in which it is taken, Christ destroyed the devil's vessels: "I disarmed the principalities and powers, and made a public example of them, triumphing over them in him" (Col 2:15). But this is not enough, *unless he first binds the strong man*. What is this binding? It occurs when the power to injure, which he has of himself, is restricted by God. Hence by the power of his own nature he can do many things, but by the power of God it is restricted, as a bound person is prevented from doing what he wants. Hence Psalm 149 (v. 8): "To bind their kings with fetters." *Then indeed he may plunder his house*, because when the devil is bound, the men he bound will be freed. "Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken, and the prey of the tyrant be rescued" (Is 49:25).

(30) *He who is not with me is against me*. Here he presents the fourth reason, which gives vigor to all the other arguments. For someone could say: if you overcame by violence, the reasoning would hold; but you do not act by violence but by suffering. Therefore, that is not a sign that you have bound anyone. So he presents the fourth reason: Things that agree in some feature have a similar wok; hence those how do similar works do not hinder one another. But I do works contrary to them. Therefore, *he who is not with me is against me*. First he presents the reason in general; secondly, he gives a specific example.

He says, therefore: *he who is not with me*... and the devil seems not to be with me, because he is contrary to my works: "What accord has Christ with Belial?" (2 Cor 6:15). That he is against him is obtained from Sirach (33:14): "Life is the opposite of death, and the sinner is the opposite of the godly"; so the opposite of man is the devil, the father of sin. But in what is he the opposite? *He who does not gather with me scatters*. For the Lord gathers: "He will gather the lambs in his arms, he will carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are young" (Is 40:11). But the devil scatters: "The wolf snatches and scatters the sheep" (Jn 10:12). But in Luke (9:50) it says: "He that is not against you is for you." But this seems contrary to what has been said. Chrysostom says that both statements are particular; hence they are not to be taken universally but in particular cases that whoever does not have my covenant is against me. Hence in Luke they are called disciples, but here devils. Or we can say that it is one way with God and another way with men. Clearly, God is the natural end toward which all things tend; therefore, whoever is not with God must be apart form him. Hence 1 Kings (18:21): "How long will you go limping with two different opinions. If the Lord is God, follow him." But it is not the same with man, because whoever is not for me is not on that account against me.

(31-32) *Therefore I tell you that every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men*... After refuting their claim< he inveighs against them: first, for the gravity of their sin; secondly, their evil intention (v. 33); thirdly, the future judgment (v. 36).

In regard to the first he does two things: first, he begins with several general statements; secondly, he explains (v. 32b).

He says, therefore: it has come to pass in the manner you claim; *therefore I tell you*. And he makes two statements. The first concerns the forgiveness of sin in general. I say that *every sin*, namely, of deed, *and blasphemy*, namely, of word, *will be forgiven men*, namely, if they repent: "He forgives all your iniquities, and heals all your infirmities" (Ps 103:3); "Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered" (Ps 32:1). And in this is refuted the opinion of Novatian, who said that not all sins are forgivable; but here it is stated that every sin is forgivable. Secondly, he mentions a special one, which is not forgiven: *but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven*, i.e., the will to blaspheme, namely, when one blasphemes from certain malice. And these are stated as a general rule.

Then he explains the first statement by the second. It has been said that *every sin*... That this is true I show by the fact that blasphemy against the Son can be forgiven. Hence *whoever says a word against the Son of man will be forgiven*, namely, if he repents. *But whoever says a word against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come*. And as Augustine says, these words are so difficult that there are no stronger words in the gospel. Therefore it should be noted that the manner of expounding is threefold. Some expound according to the letter, because they saw him working miracles and performing the works of the Holy Spirit, and said that he had an unclean spirit; therefore, they blasphemed against the Holy Spirit. And there are two explanations of this. Some say that both should be referred to the person of the Son. But there are two natures in the Son, human and divine, and according to the divine he is both spirit and holy. Hence the Son is called the Holy Spirit, not in the sense that it is taken under the aspect of one name. This is the way Hilary explains it. And there is another sense: *whoever says a word against the Son*, and against the human nature has an excuse, if he is moved by weakness; but however says anything against the divine has no excuse.

Others expound it of the Holy Spirit in as much as he is the third person in the Trinity. Hence whoever says anything against the Son of man, i.e., the human nature, will be forgiven; but anyone who speaks against the Holy Spirit working does not obtain pardon. This seems to be the full explanation and what the text says. But Augustine objects in the following way: It is obvious that all pagans blaspheme, because they do not believe that the Holy Spirit is in the Church. Again, there are many heretics, but the way to salvation is not closed to them. Furthermore, there are many Jews... But someone could say: these statements do not apply until one has accepted the faith. But if that is the case, is one to be denied forgiveness, if he repents? However, he does not say "any Christian" but "whoever". How then, should it be solved?

Augustine gives two solutions: one is found in his book on *the Lord's Sermon on the Mount*, and he retracted it later. The other is in the book *On the Words of the Lord*. Hence it is necessary to understand that a sin against the Holy Spirit is not called blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, but is taken from the way one sins. To the Holy Spirit is attributed goodness, charity and love; to goodness malice responds, to charity envy. Therefore, if anyone knows the truth and detracts from it, he sins against the Holy Spirit; likewise, if one sees holy works in someone and detracts from through envy. For envy of holiness, not of the person, is an unforgivable sin, not because it is impossible to be forgiven, but because the deformity is such that from divine justice it comes about that one does not repent. Hence those who said that he cast out devils by Beelzebub did not sin against the Holy Spirit, as Augustine claims, because they had not reached that depth of malice. But he began to say this, not because they had done it but in order that those who had begun might be warned not to reach this state.

Augustine repudiates this explanation and retracts it, because there would exist a state for which no prayer could be said; which is not true of anyone in this life.

Therefore he explains it another way in the book *On the Words of the Lord*, and it is this: Note that he did not say "whoever has said a word of blasphemy," but simply a "word". But a thing put indefinitely that way is not taken universally but sometimes particularly, as John (15:22): "If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin"; not universally, but they would have the sin of unbelief: similarly, whoever has said a word; not just any word, but a word such that, if it is spoken, it is unforgivable. But what that is, Augustine says. The Holy Spirit is charity, through which the members of the Church are united to Christ, the Head, and every sin is forgiven by the Holy Spirit. But although the entire Trinity forgives, yet it is appropriated to the Holy Spirit on account of love. Therefore, whoever has an unrepentant heart speaks against the Holy Spirit. Hence impenitence is opposed to the charity of the Holy Spirit. Consequently, not anyone who says just any word, but that special word, namely, of impenitence, is unforgivable. And he says "word" and not "words", because the custom in Scripture is to call many words one word. Hence in Isaiah the Lord often says, "You will speak my word," although he said many words to him. Hence there is no conflict with what was stated above: *therefore, I tell you, every sin and blasphemy*..., because whoever says a word against the Holy Spirit blasphemes. Hence a certain teacher, when asked what would be a sin against the Holy Spirit, said: Impenitence stores up wrath for itself.

But why is it that *it will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come* ? Are there any sins that will be forgiven in the age to come? Augustine says not. Therefore, it does not say that some sins are forgiven in the present and some in future, but that sins are so forgiven here, that the forgiveness is valid in the future. Or another way: some sins, namely, mortal, are forgiven in the present age, but others, namely, venial, in the age to come; so if someone dies in venial sin, it is clear that they can be forgiven. Hence there will be some mercy in the age to come, because then he will still be on the way. Chrysostom's explanation is quite clear and says that here he is speaking of two kinds of blasphemy, namely, against the Son of man and the Holy Spirit. They blasphemed the Son of man, because they said that he was a wine-bibber. Their blasphemy was also against the Holy Spirit, because they said that he cast out devils by a devil-spirit. For the first they had an excuse, because they did not know; but they had not excuse for what they said against the Holy Spirit, because they could not verify it by the Scriptures; therefore, they will not be forgiven. But why *neither in this age nor in the age to come* ? This is said, because some sins are punished in this age, some in the other, some both here and there. Some sins are punished only in this age, as in the case of penitents. Some only in the age to come, as those of whom it says in Job (2:13): "They spend their days in prosperity, and in a moment they go down into hell." The one punished here and in the age to come is the sin against the Holy Spirit; hence *it will be forgiven neither in this age nor in the age to come*, not because there might be forgiveness in the age to come, but because there will be punishment. Hence the meaning is that it will not be forgiven without punishment by suffering in this age and in the age to come. 'Thus do the saints speak about that sin.

It should be noted that the Master [Peter Lombard] in the Sentences, dist. 43, book 2, art. 3, makes a distinction and assigns six species of sin against the Holy Spirit: despair, presumption, impenitence, obstinacy, attack upon the known truth, and envy of a brother's grace. Hence those are said to sin against the Holy Spirit who sin against qualities appropriated to the Holy Spirit. To the Father is appropriated power, to the Son wisdom, toe the Holy Spirit goodness. Therefore, one who sins from weakness is said to sin against the Father; from ignorance against the Son; from malice against the Holy Spirit. But it should be pointed out that one sins from malice, when he sins voluntarily, which is from certain malice; and this is two ways: either because he has an inclination to sin, or because he does not. For when a person commits many sins, a habit of sinning is left in him, and so he sins from choice. Again, someone sins because that by which he was kept from sin is removed. But he is kept from sin by the hope of eternal life; hence a person who does not hope in eternal life sins from certain malice: "Despairing, they have given themselves to licentiousness" (Eph 4:19). Hence a person who sins from inclination sins against the Holy Spirit, namely, from the fact that what restrains from sin has departed. But this happens in six ways. For in God are mercy and justice. From scorning mercy arises despair; from scorning justice, presumption. Again on the part of turning away from God, because one turns to a fragile good obstinacy comes. Again on the part of turning away from God, because one does not propose to return to God, impenitence results. Then on the part of the remedy, namely, of hope and charity, there come attack on the known truth and envy of brotherly love. These are sins against the Holy Spirit. Therefore, if there is actual impenitence, it is not forgiven, not because it is not forgiven at all, but because it is not easily forgiven; for it lacks the disposition to be forgiven, but only by God's grace: just as if a person has a fever, say, tertian, he has the capacity to be cured; but if he has emitreteum he does not have the resources to be cured, because he is not cured except by divine help.

(33) He continues: *Either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad*. Above the Lord spoke against the manner of the Pharisees, in as much as they were speaking against his deeds by showing the gravity of sin; now against them he states that their doctrine is wrong. First, he presents and example; secondly, he adapts it (v. 34); thirdly, he assigns a reason (v. 34b). In regard to the first he does two things: first, he presents the example; secondly, the proof (v. 33b). He says, therefore: *Either make the tree good, and its fruit good*... This is explained in two ways. One explanation is according to Chrysostom and Jerome; the other according to Augustine. According to Chrysostom it is this: He wants to show that their vituperation is unreasonable; hence he compares actions to life, as fruit to a tree. If a person sees good fruit, he judges that the tree is good; but conversely, if it is evil. They saw Christ's actions, for example, the expulsion of demons, and this was good; therefore, what you say is quite unreasonable. And most suitably he goes from effect to cause, as the Apostle says in Romans (1;20): "The invisible things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen from the things that were made..." Hence he wants to say *either you*, namely, the Pharisees, *make*, i.e., concede, that if the fruit is good, the tree is good; or make, i.e., say that the fruit is evil, and thus the tree is evil. And this you cannot say.

Augustine, however, refers to the intention. They said that he cast out devils by Beelzebub Therefore, he wants to show from what root this accusation proceeded, because it was from the malice in their hearts. So he says, *either make*... Here two things are presented: one is meritorious and ought to be done, namely, *make the tree good*, i.e., do the work and apply the energy required for being a good tree, which a man cannot be without preparation. Hence, do what is required to be a good tree, and then the fruit will be good and your words good. But the statement which follows indicates something to avoid, namely, *or make the tree evil and its fruit evil*, i.e., or you will pursue malice, and so you will be on an evil tree and your fruit evil: "I have planted you a choice vine, wholly of pure seed. How then have you turned degenerate and become a wild vine?" (Jer 2:21). According to both renditions the proof which follows is suitable: *For the tree is known by its fruit*, because by good fruit a good tree is known, and by evil fruit an evil one.

(34) *You brood of vipers*... This is subsumed under the foregoing in various ways depending on the varying explanations. According to Augustine it is an application to the foregoing thus: It has been said, *either make the tree good*... But you do evil. You are an evil tree and, as such, you do evil, because you cannot say good things. According to others' explanation, he is showing the source from which this malice comes and calls the Pharisees a brood of vipers, because those who are malicious from their youth retain it more firmly; therefore, their malice is called the malice of a viper: "A young man according to his way, when he is old, he will not depart from it" (Pr 22:6). Consequently, it often happens that those with evil parents are readier for evil: "We have known the iniquities of our fathers" (Jer 12:20). Hence it is good for a man to be trained in the good. Also it is the nature of serpents to eject poison with their tongues, and evil men do likewise: "The tongue of a viper will kill him" (Jb 20:16); "They make their tongue sharp as a serpent's" (Ps 140:3). And so he says, *How can you speak good?* He does not say "do good," but *speak*, because you are the offspring of a viper, which inflicts injury with the tongue; therefore, since you are imitators of the crime of your fathers, how can you speak good? As if to say: You cannot.

He assigns the reason: first, in general; secondly, in particular (v. 35). He says, therefore: So you are unable to speak good. Why? Because you are evil. Why? *Because from the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks*, for the word is the messenger of the mind. He says, *from the abundance of the heart*, because, according to Chrysostom, when a person speaks from malice, it is a sign that greater malice is in the heart, for no one fears what he keeps within. Therefore, when he utters something out of malice, it is a sign that more is within, although he dares not say it. Hence he says, *from the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks*. And from the abundance of malice within the mouth speaks, and this is true of good and of evil. Hence Jeremiah (20:9): "The Lord's word is in me as a burning fire." In regard to evil it is similar, because from malice some conceive something they cannot keep within: "The spirit within me impels me" (Jb 32:18).

(35) *The good man from his good treasure brings forth good*. The statement that *from the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks* he explains in particular. The word which proceeds from a thought is as a gift from a treasure. Hence if the thought is good, the word is good; and conversely. The good treasure is knowledge of the truth and fear of the Lord: "Abundance of salvation, wisdom and knowledge; the fear of the Lord is his treasure" (Is 33:6). Likewise, and evil treasure is evil thinking; and from this treasure only evil proceeds: "Treasures of wickedness do not profit" (Pr 10:2). Note: what is said there of words is understood also of deeds. For as the thought is the wellspring of speech, so intention is of action. Therefore, if the intention is good, the action is good. Hence a Gloss: "You do according as you intent." This statement seems open to objection in regard to good. Suppose that someone wants to steal in order to give an alms: the act is evil and the intention good. Therefore... I answer that intending and willing are sometimes distinguished, namely, when in one and the same act the willing and the intention differ. Willing bears on the object wanted, but intention on the end. Willing, for example, is when I will to go to a window to see the people passing by; the latter is the intention. Hence it is necessary that willing and intending be one. Hence we can consider intention and willing in a wide sense, as in the assertion that if the willing is evil, the act is evil. Yet if it be excluded and taken in the proper sense, it is not true. But granted that intention and the act of willing are one, what then? I answer that the root of merit lies in charity, but consequently in the merit of other virtues. For merit looks at the essential reward, within which charity is considered. Thus, any work whatsoever that is performed with greater charity has more merit. But charity alone has God for object and end. Hence the merit of charity corresponds to the substantial reward, the merit of the other virtues to the accidental reward. Therefore, because charity permeates the intention, to the extent that one does something from greater charity to that extent he achieves; but in regard to accidental reward, this is not so.

(36) *I tell you*... The Lord rebuked them for the gravity of their sin and their malice; here he warns them about the future judgment, which we hold by faith: "Be afraid of the sword, for anger brings the punishment of the sword; for know that there will be a judgment" (Jb 19:29); "He will make room for every act of mercy; everyone will receive in accordance with his deeds" (Sir 16:14). Again 2 Corinthians (5:10): For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may receive good or evil, according to what he has done in the body." Hence there will be an investigation, because each one will render an account of his deeds. Therefore, he also adds something about words: *I say to you, on the day of judgment men will render account for every careless word they utter*. This is said in Wisdom (1:9): "He that speaks unrighteous things will not escape notice" and that the sound of murmuring will not go unheard. Why does he say *for every carless [idle] word* ? A word is called idle in two ways: in on way every evil word is called idle; because that is called idle which does not attain its purpose, as when a person hunts for a man and does not find him, the search is said to have been idle. But if a word is given to instruct, when it succeeds, it is not idle: "Let no evil talk come out of your minds, but only such as is good for edifying, that it may impart grace to those who hear" (Eph 4:29). And according to Chrysostom, it refers to the fact that they said, "by Beelzebub". That word was most pernicious and also idle. According to Jerome the former is a word that inflicts harm, and idle one is that which does not afford any benefit. According to Gregory any word lightly spoken is called idle, unless it has a pious use or a pious need. But it is clear that they spoke a pernicious word. Why does he mention only idle? Because he wishes to argue from the lesser; because if one must render an account for an idle word, then more so for a pernicious one.

(37) Then he gives the reason: *for by your words you will be justified*... In the courts of this world the innocent are sometimes punished and the wicked set free, because judgments are based on the statements of witnesses; but in god's court judgment is based on the person accusing himself, namely, on self-confession. Hence lest you suppose that you will be judged on the basis of what others say about you rather than what you say about yourself, he says, *by your words you will be justified and by your words you will be condemned*: "I will condemn you out of your own mouth, you wicked servant" (Lk 19:22).


## 12—3

Mt 12:38-45


> 38. Then some of the scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying: Master, we would see a sign from thee. 41. The men of Ninive shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: because they did penance at the preaching of Jonas. And behold a greater than Jonas here. 42. The queen of the south shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon here. 43. And when an unclean spirit is gone out of a man he walketh through dry places seeking rest, and findeth none. 44. Then he saith: I will return into my house from whence I came out. And coming he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. 45. Then he goeth, and taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that man is made worse than the first. So shall it be also to this wicked generation.

Having answered those who maligned his miracles and doctrine, the Lord now deals with those testing him: first, a question testing him is presented; secondly, the reproval.

(38) He says, therefore, *Then they said to him*... This is after they had seen many miracles and heard many words of wisdom, to fulfill what was said in Sirach (22:7): "He who teaches a fool is like talking to a person asleep." *Teacher, we wish to see a sign from you*. They say, *Teacher*, as part of the testing: "They speak peace with their neighbors, while mischief is in their hearts" (Ps 28:3). *We wish to see a sign from you*. Had they not seen many signs? Yes, but another evangelist presents it this way: "We wish to see a sign from heaven" (Lk 11:16), as it is written in 1 Samuel (12:18) that Samuel made it thunder and Elijah made fire come from heaven (2 Kgs 1:10). For the Jews are wont to seek a sign, as it says in 1 Corinthians (1:22). But since he had given earthly signs and they did not believe, they would not have believed if he had given them signs from heaven: "If I have told you earthly things and you do not believe, how can you believe if I tell you heavenly things?" (Jn 3:12).

(39) *But he answered them*... Then he refuses them and does two things: first, he denies the request; secondly, he predicts and indignity (v. 41).

In regard to the first he tells what they were seeking; secondly, he denies (v. 39b).

It is stated, therefore, that *he answered them, "An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign."* He says, *evil*, because they were laying traps. A person is called evil, because he harms his neighbor. Therefore an evil generation of wicked children. It is called an adulterous generation: "You draw near higher, sons of the sorceress, offspring of the adulterer and the harlot" (Is 57:3). Therefore that generation, so subject to sin, *seeks a sign; but no sign shall be given it except the sign of the prophet Jonah*: "Ask a sign of the Lord, your God; et it be as deep as Sheol or as high as heaven" (Is 7:10). Therefore they sought a sign from heaven, but they were unworthy to se it. For he gave this to his apostles, who saw him ascending and who saw God's glory on the mount. But the others will be given only a sign in hell as to the soul and on earth as to the body. Hence *no sign will be given it except the sign of the prophet Jonah*. Hence Christ's death is denoted and God's love shown, as the Apostle says: "When we were yet sinners according to the time Christ died for us..." (Rom 5:8). Furthermore, the power of the one raising is shown, as s indicated in 1 Cor (15:20 ff). And these are the signs of things that ought to be present in us. By Christ's death is signified that we should die to sin; by the resurrection, that we should rise from sin.

(40) *For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the whale*, i.e., actually, *so will the son of Man be in the heart of the earth*. And in this the error of Manicheus is refuted which said that he did not truly die. And he says, *in the heart of the earth*, because as a man's heart is in the depths, so Christ was in the depth of the earth. Or, *in the heart of the earth*, i.e., in the heart of the worldly mind of the disciples who despaired of him, as it says in Luke (24:21): "We had hope that he was the one to redeem Israel." *For three days and three nights*. But a question arises here. For this passage seems to be false, because he died at 3 o'clock, was buried in the evening, but rose on the morning of the third day. Augustine says that some want to say that one must start from the hour when he was put on the cross. Hence they call the darkness which appeared the first day, the second day was the night of the evening star, the third was the day of Sabbath. But according to Augustine, this is invalid; although it would help, if he had been in the tomb for the entire Sunday. Therefore we must have recourse to another solution, namely, that a natural day composed of day and night is taken as an interval of twenty-four hours. But, as Augustine says, in Scripture a part is sometimes taken for the whole. Therefore we must say that it is by synecdoche that Christ is said to have been in the tomb for three days and three nights, because Friday is taken for the whole day and even the previous night; there is no doubt about the second day, but the third is taken for the night and the following day. Yet if we regard what actually happened, it was a case of two nights and one day, to denote that his single destroyed our double. Punishment and guilt were in us, but only punishment in him; therefore...

Another question arises. Had he not worked many miracles? Had he not raised Lazarus and a number of others? Why then does he say, *no sign shall be given to it except the sign of Jonah the prophet* ? I answer that the kind of sign they demand will not be given; or no sign that will benefit them will be given, for he knew that they would not be converted, because they were hardened. But he performed many signs for the sake of the elect and believers, of whom there were many afterwards.

(41) *The men of Nineveh will arise at the judgment with this generation*. This is the indignity: first, the gentiles are preferred; secondly, the reason (v. 43).

Note that a person is good, either because he does not sin or because he repents. First, therefore, he prefers those who have repented, namely, the gentiles; secondly, those who have sinned (v. 42).

The Lord had compared his resurrection to Jonah; therefore they could believe that it would happen to them as to the Ninevites, who were set free. But the Jews were not only set free, they were dispersed. Hence the *men of Nineveh*... In these words an error of the Jews is excluded, namely, that the resurrection will occur before the judgment and that in the meantime Jerusalem will be rebuilt. And they appeal to Isaiah (25:6): "On this mountain the Lord will make a feast of fat things." Others said that the just and martyrs will rise one thousand years before the others, and they appeal to Revelation (20:1): "Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, holding in his hand the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain. And he seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years, and threw him into the pit, and shut it and sealed it over him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years were ended." Both are excluded when he says, *They will arise with this generation*, the good and those not good together. *And will condemn it*, by comparison but not by any authority, because they will rise among those to be condemned: "This is Jerusalem; I have set her in the center of the nations, with countries round about her. And she has wickedly rebelled against my statutes more than the countries round about her" (Ez 5:5). And why will they condemn them? *Because they repented*; but the scribes and Pharisees were not willing to do penance.

The Lord began his preaching with penance as the theme, as did John, but they did not listen: "No on repents of his wickedness" (Jer 8:6). Furthermore, the others did penance at one preaching by Jonah; but Jesus had preached to them many times, and yet they were not converted: "If I had not done among them the works which no one else did, they would not have sin" (Jn 15:24). Again, the former were converted by the preaching of one prophet; but the latter had not only a prophet but the Son of God. Hence it says in Hebrews (1:1): "In many and various ways God spoke of old to our fathers by the prophets; but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, through whom also he created the world." And he continues: *and behold a greater than Jonah here*, as in Hebrews (3:3): "Yet Jesus was counted worthy of as much more glory than Moses as the builder of a house has more glory than the house. Therefore the Ninevites are preferred, because they did penance.

(42) *The queen of the South will arise at the judgment with this generation and condemn it* because of wisdom, which they refused to receive. It is recorded of her in 1 Kings (10:24) that she came to hear the wisdom of Solomon. She signifies the Church of believers: "At your right hand stands the queen in gold of Ophir." The Church is called *queen*, because it ought to rule: "A king who sits on the throne of judgment winnows all evil with his eyes" (Pr 20:8). *Of the south* by reason of the Holy Spirit: "Awake, O north wind, and come, O south wind. Blow upon my garden..." (S of S 4:16). That queen *will arise in the judgment with that generation*. Note that it does not say she did not sin, but that she was not rebellious. Why? *Because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon*, as it says in 1 Kings (10:24); and there was no need for you to come from the ends of the earth, because he is here. Hence: *behold a greater than Solomon here*, because he was a temporal king and a sinner, but hers is one innocent and eternal: "His power is an everlasting power which shall not pass away, and his kingdom one that shall not be destroyed" (Dan 7:14).

(43) *When the unclean spirit has gone out of a man*... Above he showed that the gentiles were preferable to the Jews; here he wants to confirm this with an example. First, he present the example; secondly, he applies it (v. 45b).

He gives the example of an unclean spirit. But one must keep in mind that sometimes an example is taken from some occurrence, sometimes from a parable. When it is taken from an occurrence, it is required that each be explained separately, so that both need their own explanation, as was done here, when the example of Jonah was presented. Sometimes the example from a parable is presented, as when it is said, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto..." In this case there is no need to state what is in the kingdom of heaven. "Therefore we can say according to Jerome that it is a similitude and a parable. In that case there is one sense. Or, according to Augustine, it is taken from an occurrence, and then there are two senses.

The unclean spirit goes out of a man in two ways, because sometimes he torments a man in a bodily way, sometimes in a spiritual. Hence it is necessary to see how a man is filled with an unclean spirit; how in a bodily manner and how in a spiritual; thirdly, how it pertains to the matter at hand. Therefore, four things were said: first, liberation from an unclean spirit; secondly, repeated affliction; thirdly, the occasion; fourthly, the occasion of the second affliction.

He says, therefore, *When the unclean spirit has gone out of a man*... Anything mixed with a baser thing is called unclean, with a purer thing, more pure. For example, if silver is mixed with lead, it becomes baser. Accordingly, a created spirit, if it is united with one lower than itself, is called an unclean spirit. And sometimes it goes out of a man, whom it was harassing corporeally, and sometimes whom it was vexing spiritually, as in baptism. Consequently, the renewed harassment is mentioned, as well as the occasion: first, on the part of the demon; secondly, on the part of those harassed. On the part of the demon, in regard to those others; secondly, as to these. For it is the demon's custom to be restless unless he causes harm, because he loved sin from the beginning. Hence when he is expelled from anyone, he looks elsewhere to cause vexation. Hence he says, *he walks through dry places seeking rest, but he finds none*. Hence sometimes he does not find rest. Where he does is described in Job (40:21): "Under the lotus plant he lies, in the covert of the reeds and in the marsh." Marshy places are hearts given to voluptuous pleasures; dry places are those who scorn such pleasures but are turned aside by prosperity. Ezekiel (37:11) says of these: "Our bones are dried up, and our hop is lost." He says, *he walks* and seeks out any man he might deceive. Hence the fact that he walks shows his diligence: "Be sober, be watchful. Your adversary, the devil, goes about like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour" (1 Pt 5:8). *Seeking rest, but he finds none* except in marshy places. So it was that leaving the Jews, he went to the gentiles who are dry of the dew of divine grace; but he did not find rest, because he was cast out, for they received God's word.

(44) *Then he says, 'I will return to the house from which came.'* From these words you can gather that if the devil is ever driven out of a person because he does penance, he does not leave him forever, for it is written of Christ that the devil left him for a time (Lk 4:13). From this we are given to understand that men should always be on their guard, lest he return. And this is why he says, *I will return*...

*And coming, he finds it empty*. Here is presented the occasion for his second harassment. And if we refer it to the Jews, it is plain that when he was driven from the gentiles, he returned to the Jews. Hence three occasions for his return are presented, namely, idleness; therefore he says, *empty*: "Idleness teaches much evil" (Sir 33:24). Accordingly, Jerome: "Always do something good, so that the devil will find you busy." Hence *empty*, i.e., idle: "The foe gloated over her, mocking at her downfall" (Lam 1:7). *Swept with brooms*, because something cleaned with brooms is not thoroughly cleaned. Hence sweeping amounts to superficial cleaning. A thorough cleaning needs fire, as it says in the Law that vessels should be cleansed with fire. *And ornamented*, i.e., superficially adorned. Something ornamented has its own beauty and a beauty that comes from the adornment: "May our daughters be like corner pillars, adorned as alikeness of the temple" (Ps 144:12). But those who would be secure ought to have an inward beauty: "The princess is decked in her chamber with gold-woven robes; in many-colored robes she is led to the king" (Ps 45:13). But when the adornment is only external, one is not left by the devil. So it was with the Jews, for they observed the Sabbath by resting from good more than from evil. They also showed too much concern about the trivial matters of the Law.

(45) *Then he goes and brings with him seven other spirits more evil than himself*. Here he deals with the second and more serious harassment. It is shown to be more serious, first, as to the number; secondly, as to duration; thirdly, as to effect. As to number, because *he brings seven*. Accordingly to Chrysostom the literal explanation is that when anyone falls and is not careful, something worse happens to him: "See, you are well! Sin no more, that nothing worse befall you" (Jn 5:14). According to Augustine he brings seven in two ways: for sometimes a penitent does penance, but then acts negligently; as a result he becomes more prone: "god gave them up to a base mind" (Rom 1:28). By the fact that he says *seven* the entire number of vices is signified. Augustine, however, explains it differently: some commit a certain sin, but in the state of repentance they add hypocrisy. And just as the gifts of the Holy Spirit are seven, so there are seven hypocrisies. Hence they were simple vices at first, then are added the hypocrisies, which are worse. And they are described as seven either on account of the totality of vices or on account of the Sabbath. Those who sin in this way will become fixed in evil; hence he says, they enter and dwell there, because they do not wish to leave: "Why then has this people turned away in perpetual backsliding? They hold fast to deceit, they refuse to return" (Jer 8:5). If it is applied to the Jews, it is clear that he dwells in them and does not wish to depart from them.

*And the last state of that man becomes worse than the first*. This refers to the effect of the harassment. Literally, one who is punished more is harassed more; hence 2 Peter (2:21): "It would have been better for them never to have known the way or righteousness than after knowing it to turn back from the holy commandment." Again, as to the Jews, who acted worse by blaspheming Christ than by worshipping idols. Therefore he concludes: *So shall it be with this evil generation*, because it will be come worse for them than it was for those in Egypt.


## 12—4

Mt 12:46-50


> 46. As he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold his mother and his brethren stood without, seeking to speak to him. 47. And one said unto him: Behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without, seeking thee. 48. But he answering him that told him, said: Who is my mother, and who are my brethren? 49. And stretching forth his hand towards his disciples, he said: Behold my mother and my brethren. 50. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father, that is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.

In the preceding section Christ answered his opponents; now he uses the presence of his mother and brothers as an occasion for commending the disciples who believed.

First, their presence is noted; secondly, the disciples are commended (v. 48).

(46) He says, therefore, *While he was still speaking*. Here one might ask why it is that in Luke (8:19), where the same words as Matthew's are presented, the words that follow in Matthew are not mentioned; rather Luke (12:27) continues with: "As he said this, a woman in the crowd raised her voice..." So there seems to be a difficulty. Augustine answers: There is not doubt that this event occurred, as Matthew says, while he was yet speaking. But it is possible that both what Luke says and what Matthew says happened; it is also possible that Luke is anticipating or is presenting events in the order he recalls.

*Behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside*... There is no doubt but that the mother is the person mentioned in ch. 1; but there can be question about the brothers. And because brothers are mentioned, it gave occasion to the heresy that after the virgin gave birth to Jesus, Joseph knew Mary and begot sons of her. This Who was is heretical, because after bearing Christ she remained an immaculate virgin. Another opinion was that these were Joseph's children by another wife. But This is nothing, because we believe that Joseph was a virgin, as the mother of Jesus was, because he entrusted the Virgin to a virgin; and as at the end, so also in the beginning. Who, then, are those brothers? Jerome says that men are called brothers in many ways. Some are brothers by nature, as above (ch. 1): "Jacob was the father of Judah and his brothers." Sometimes members of the same race are called brothers: "You may not put a foreigner over you, who is not your brother" (Dt 17:15); sometimes by reason of religion, as all Christians (below 23:8). And upon this rests the custom of calling all members of the same religious order brothers. Sometimes men born of a common ancestor, as in Joshua (2:12): "Give me a sure sing that you will save alive my father an mother, my brothers and sisters." Sometimes all men, because they come from one father, namely, God: "Have we not all one father? Has not one God created us? Why then are we faithless to one another?" (Mal 2:10). In none of these ways are they called brothers of the Lord here; therefore, some are called brothers in another way, namely, because of blood-relationship. Hence in Genesis (13:8) Abraham said to Lot: "For we are brothers," although Lot was his nephew. So, they were brothers, because they were cousins of the Lord.

(47) *Someone told him, "Your mother and brothers are standing outside, asking to speak to you."* Why he said this and the need for it are explained in Luke (8:19), namely, there was such a crowd that they could not reached him. Mystically, the synagogue is signified by the mother; hence Song of Songs (3:11): "Go forth and behold king Solomon with the crown with which his mother crowned him." *And brothers*, i.e., the Jews, who stood outside and abandoned Christ: "My brothers have abandoned me" (Jb 6:15). They seek but do not find, as it says in Romans (9:31): "The Jews who pursued the righteousness not based on the Law did not succeed in fulfilling that Law."

(48) *But he replied*... Here he gives Christ's reply and does two things: first, he replies; secondly, he commends his disciples (v. 49). He says, *"Who is my mother and who are my brothers?"* From these words some have denied that Christ truly assumed flesh, but only seemed to. Hence they explained: this is not my mother and these are not my brothers. But this is contrary to the Apostle to the Galatians (4:4): "God sent forth his Son, born of woman..." Again to the Romans (1:3): "Who was descended from David according to the flesh." Furthermore, the Lord acknowledged her at the foot of the cross: "Woman, behold your son" (Jn 19:26). Chrysostom: Why does the Lord ask, "who is my mother and who are my brothers"? And he says two things, one of which is sound and the other not. For he says that his mother and brothers experienced something human, for they were elated when they saw Christ preaching and the crowd following. Therefore, they wanted, as it were, to share the glory. Consequently, the Lord wanted to whom that what he was doing did not stem from what he had received fro the mother but from the Father. This position is partly sound, for it is sound in regard to the brothers, because John (7:5) says: "For even his brothers did not believe in him." But it is not sound in regard to the mother, because it is believed that she never sinned either mortally or venially; for it is said of her in Song of Songs (4:7): "You are all beautiful, my love, and there is no stain in you." And Augustine: When it comes to sin, I want no mention to be made of her. Jerome answers in another way, namely, he was so intent on spiritual matters, that he paid no attention to temporal. Therefore, he directs his answer to affection. Hence he would not have loved his mother more, unless she possessed more spiritually. So he says, *who is my mother?* He does not deny that she is his mother, but he intends to forbid undue affection. Hence above (10:37): "He that loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me."

(49) Then he commends the disciples: first, the immediate disciples; secondly, all believers. Therefore, the evangelist says, *And stretching out his hand toward his disciples, he said: "Here are my mother and my brothers."* As if to say: I love them more than the affections of my mother or brothers; for love of the Holy Spirit must rank first. And he extends his hand not only to those but to all.

(50) Hence it says, *Whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother, and sister, and mother."* For he had a heavenly generation and a temporal one, and he places the heavenly ahead of the temporal. For those who do the will of his Father are related to him according to heavenly generation; hence John (8:39): "If you are the sons of Abraham, do the works of Abraham." For he came to do his will, as John says (4:34, 5:30, 6:38). He says, *brother*, to indicate the stronger ones and *sisters* the weaker. But why does he say *is my mother* ? I answer that every believer who does the Father's will, i.e., who obeys simply, is a brother, because he is like him who fulfilled the Father's will. But one who not only does that but converts others begets Christ in others and so is a mother. On the other hand, one who incites others to evil kills Christ in others. The Apostle to the Galatians (4:19): "My little children, with whom I am again in travail, until Christ be formed in you."
