# Lecture 3 — Beginning of preaching

^4:23^ And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom: and healing all manner of sickness and every infirmity, among the people. [n. 384]  

> ^4:24^ And his fame went throughout all Syria, and they presented to him all sick people who were taken with diverse diseases and torments, and such as were possessed by devils, and lunatics, and paralytics, and he cured them. [n. 389]

> ^4:25^ And many people followed him from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond the Jordan. [n. 394]

> **383**. It is customary amongst kings that, the army being gathered together, they proceed to war; just so, Christ, with the army of apostles gathered together, proceeds to fighting against the devil by the office of preaching, to expel him from the world. Hence Christ’s teaching and preaching is treated of here. And set down is

first, Christ’s preaching;  

second, the effect of the preaching, at ***and his fame went throughout all Syria***.  

Concerning the first, he touches upon three things.  

First, the concern of the one teaching, and the manner of teaching, and the confirmation of the teaching set forth.  

**384**. And the concern is shown in two things, because he was not seeking his own rest; hence, he ***went about***; *in carefulness, not slothful* (Rom 12:11). Second, because he was not an acceptor of persons, whether of region or of village, but he ***went about all Galilee***, without difference; *let us go into the neighbouring towns and cities, that I may preach there also* (Mark 1:38); *in every place of his dominion* (Ps 102:22).  

**385**. The manner, at ***teaching in their synagogues***. He says two things, ***teaching*** and ***preaching***: teaching what should be done in the present, and foretelling the future; or teaching those things which pertain to the instruction of morals, *I am the Lord your God who teaches you profitable things* (Isa 48:17), foretelling the future, *how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him who brings good tidings, and who preaches peace: of him who shows forth good, who preaches salvation* (Isa 52:7). Or teaching natural justice, for certain things are brought forward in theology which natural reason dictates, namely justice and suchlike, and regarding this he says, ***teaching***; but certain things are brought forth which exceed reason, such as the mystery of the Trinity and suchlike, and regarding this he says, ***preaching***.  

**386**. But there is an objection here about what the Gloss says, that he was teaching natural justice, such as chastity, and humility, and so on: for it does not seem that the natural virtues can be called virtues, since the virtues come through grace.  

And one should say that the inclination, and the beginning, is natural; but the perfection, by which a man is rendered pleasing, is by grace, political things, and habituation.  

**387**. ***In their synagogues***. Note two things. First, that he sought the multitude, so that the preaching might accomplish more; *I will give thanks to you in a great church* (Ps 34:18). Likewise, that he preached only to the Jews; *to you it behooved us first to speak the word of God* (Acts 13:46). ***And preaching the Gospel of the kingdom***: not fables and curious things, but those things which pertained to the kingdom of God, and those which would profit men.  

**388**. Next, the preaching is confirmed by miracles; *but they going forth preached everywhere: the Lord working withal, and confirming the word with signs that followed* (Mark 16:20). Hence, ***healing***. Sickness can be referred to bodily infirmity, and infirmities to infirmity of the soul; for the infirmities of the soul are not less than the infirmities of the body. Or, by sicknesses are meant heavy and long-lasting infirmities, while by infirmities are meant any other. *Who heals all your diseases* (Ps 102:3); *the physician cuts off a short sickness* (Sir 10:12). One is also given to understand in this that preachers should confirm their teaching with works; even if not with miracles, with a virtuous life; *for I dare not to speak of any of those things which Christ works not by me, for the obedience of the gentiles, by word and deed, by the virtue of signs and wonders, in the power of the Holy Spirit* (Rom 15:18–19).  

**389**. ***And his fame went throughout all Syria***. Here the effect of the preaching is set down. And it is threefold, namely regarding example, the confidence which men had in him, and the devotion with which men followed him.  

**390**. It says then, ***and his fame went throughout all Syria***. Syria is the region from Capernaum to the great sea; hence, he was made well known in the land of the gentiles, too. This also pertains to preachers, that they should have good testimony; *take care of a good name* (Sir 41:15); *carefully study to present yourself approved unto God, a workman that does not need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth* (2 Tim 2:15).  

Moreover, by ***Syria*** can be understood the pride of the world, because it is so interpreted; and the fame of Christ is spread through the whole world.  

**391**. The confidence, at ***they presented to him all sick people who were taken with diverse diseases***; for they knew that he could heal. *Heal me, O Lord, and I will be healed: save me, and I will be saved* (Jer 17:14). And it says first, ***his fame went throughout***, and after that, ***they presented to him***, because when someone has a reputation for holiness, men more readily expose their wounds to his knowledge. ***With diverse diseases and torments***. By these heavy infirmities are indicated spiritual infirmities. By ***diseases*** can be understood long-lasting infirmities, and enduring infirmity is indicated; *a long sickness is troublesome to the physician* (Sir 10:11). And because some are burdened by infirmity, and others by the bitterness of sorrow, this is indicated when it says, ***and torments***; and those who have a tormenting, burdened conscience are indicated. *The sorrows of death surrounded me: and the torrents of iniquity troubled me* (Ps 17:5). ***And such as were possessed by devils***; and this is what is said in Luke, *and they that were troubled with unclean spirits, were cured* (Luke 6:18). By this is understood those who worshipped idols; *for all the gods of the gentiles are devils* (Ps 95:5); *and I would not that you should be made partakers with devils* (1 Cor 10:20).  

**392**. Those are properly called ***lunatics*** who suffer a certain weakness of insanity in the waning of the moon; and then they are taken up by demons. And the devil afflicts them more at that time for two reasons. Jerome gives one, and it is that he might defame a creature of God; and this also happens in the effects of the magic art, by which demons are called under certain constellations, and demons come for this purpose, that they might exalt the creature, and lead men into idolatry.  

The second reason is better: because the devil cannot do anything except through the powers of a body. Now, there is no doubt that lower bodies are changed according to the various changes of the higher bodies. And therefore the devil, called at that time, comes gladly when he sees the higher bodies working toward that effect for which he is called. Moreover, in the waning of the moon, as is clear, fluids are diminished; and so the waning of the moon works toward such infirmity, when the earth is not full of fluids. And this is why the devil vexes more at that time; and this is ***and lunatics***.  

**393**. By ***them*** we can understand the inconstant, *a holy man continues in wisdom as the sun: but a fool is changed as the moon* (Sir 27:12), who have the intention of living chastely, but are overcome by passions, *for I do not that good which I will; but the evil which I hate, that I do* (Rom 7:15). ***And paralytics***. Those are properly called paralytics who have their members loosened such that they are not able to gain control of their members. By these are signified the ignorant; and all these are cured by Christ, hence, ***and he cured them***, that is, perfectly.  

**394**. Next, the third effect is set down, namely the devotion of those who followed; hence, ***and many people followed him***. *And arise, O Lord my God, in the precept which you have commanded: and a congregation of people will surround you* (Ps 7:7–8).  

But one should know that men were following in different ways. For some, that is, the apostles, followed with a zeal for salvation, namely spiritual salvation; hence above: ***leaving their nets, they followed him* **(Matt 4:20); and, ***behold we have left all things, and have followed you*** (Matt 19:27). Some followed with a zeal for bodily salvation; *and a very great multitude of people from all Judea and Jerusalem, and the sea coast both of Tyre and Sidon, who had come to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases* (Luke 6:17–18). Some followed only out of curiosity, to see miracles; *and a great multitude followed him, because they saw the miracles which he did on them that were diseased* (John 6:2). Others followed to lie in ambush, such as the Pharisees and scribes; *for I heard the reproaches of many, and terror on every side* (Jer 20:10).  

**395**. ***From Galilee***. This is the province where Christ first began to preach, and it is interpreted as ‘transmigration’. This signifies those who should transmigrate from vices to virtues. ***And from Decapolis***. This is a region where there are ten villages; and it signifies those who are zealous in observing the ten commandments. ***And from Jerusalem***. Jerusalem is interpreted as ‘vision of peace’; and it signifies those who come to Christ in the desire for peace; *much peace have those who love your law* (Ps 118:165). ***And from Judea***. Judea is interpreted as ‘confession’, and signifies those who come to Christ through the remission of sins; *made his sanctuary, Israel his dominion* (Ps 113:2). ***And from beyond the Jordan***. And this signifies those who come to Christ through baptism, for baptism was prefigured in the Jordan.
