# Acts to Be Made at the Beginning of Every Visit to the Blessed Sacrament

My Lord Jesus Christ, who for the love you bear to men remain night and day in this Sacrament, full of compassion and of love, waiting, calling, and welcoming all who come to visit you: I believe that you are present in the Sacrament of the altar; I adore you from the abyss of my nothingness, and I thank you for all the graces you have bestowed on me, especially for having given me yourself in this Sacrament, for having given me your most holy Mother Mary as my advocate, and for having called me to visit you in this church. I salute your most loving Heart today, and I intend to salute it for three purposes: first, in thanksgiving for this great gift; second, to make reparation for all the injuries you have received from all your enemies in this Sacrament; third, I intend by this visit to adore you in all the places on earth where you dwell in the Sacrament, least reverenced and most abandoned. My Jesus, I love you with all my heart. I repent of having in the past so many times offended your infinite goodness. I resolve, with the help of your grace, never to offend you again in the future; and in my present miserable state I consecrate myself entirely to you. I give you and I renounce my entire will, my affections, my desires, and all that is mine. From this day forward, do with me and with all that belongs to me whatever pleases you. I ask for and desire only your holy love, final perseverance, and the perfect fulfillment of your will. I commend to you the souls in purgatory, especially the most devoted to the Blessed Sacrament and to the Blessed Virgin Mary. I commend to you also all poor sinners. Finally, my dear Savior, I unite all my affections with the affections of your most loving Heart, and thus united I offer them to your Eternal Father, and I beg him in your name and for your love to accept and answer them.
