# Section 9

1 Matthew 5:33 You have heard also that it was said unto the ancients, Lie not, but perform unto 2 God in your oaths: Matthew 5:34 but I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it 3 is God's throne; Matthew 5:35 nor by the earth, for it is a footstool under his feet; nor yet by 4 Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. Matthew 5:36 Neither shall you swear by your 5 head, for you can not make in it one lock of hair black or white. Matthew 5:37 But your word shall be either Yea or Nay, and what is in excess of this is of the evil one.

6, 7 Matthew 5:38 You have heard that it was said, Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth: Matthew 5:39 but I say unto you, Stand not in opposition to the evil; but whosoever smites you on your right 8 cheek, turn to him also the other. Matthew 5:40 And he that would sue you, and take your tunic, 9 leave to him also your wrapper. Matthew 5:41 And whosoever compels you one mile, go with 10 [Arabic, p. 35] him two. Matthew 5:42 And he that asks you, give unto him: Luke 6:30b and he that would borrow of you, prevent him not. And prosecute not him that takes your 11 substance. Luke 6:31 And as you desire that men should do to you, so do ye also to them.

12, 13 Matthew 5:43 You have heard that it was said, Love your neighbour and hate your enemy: Matthew 5:44 but I say unto you, Love your enemies, and pray for those that curse you, and deal well with those that hate you, and pray for those who take you with violence and persecute you; 14 Matthew 5:45 that you may be sons of your heavenly Father, who makes his sun to rise on the good and the evil, and sends down his rain on the righteous and the 15 unrighteous. Matthew 5:46 If you love them that love you, what reward shall you have? Luke 6:32b for the publicans 16 and sinners also love those that love them. Luke 6:33 And if you do a kindness to those 17 who treat you well, where is your superiority? For sinners also do likewise. Luke 6:34 And if you lend to him of whom you hope for a reward, where is your superiority? For the 18 sinners also lend to sinners, seeking recompense from them. Luke 6:35 But love your enemies, and do good to them, and lend, and cut not off the hope of any man; that your reward may be great, and you may be the children of the Highest: for he is lenient 19 towards the wicked and the ungrateful. Luke 6:36 Be merciful, even as your Father also is 20 merciful. Matthew 5:47 And if you inquire for the good of your brethren only, what more have 21 ye done *than others?* is not this the conduct of the publicans also? Matthew 5:48 Be now perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

22 Matthew 6:1 Consider your alms; do them not before men to let them see you: and if it be not 23 so, you have no reward before your Father which is in the heavens. Matthew 6:2 When then you give an alms now, do not sound a trumpet before you, as do the people of hypocrisy, [Arabic, p. 36] in the synagogues and the marketplaces, that men may praise them. And 24 verily say I unto you, They have received their reward. Matthew 6:3 But you, when 25 you do alms, let your left hand not know what your right hand does; Matthew 6:4 that your alms may be concealed: and your Father which sees in secret shall reward you openly.

26 Matthew 6:5 And whenever you pray, be not as the hypocrites, who love to stand in the synagogues and in the corners of the marketplaces for prayers, that men may behold 27 them. Matthew 6:6 And verily say I unto you, They have received their reward. But you, when you pray, enter into your closet, and fasten your door, and pray to your Father in secret, and your Father which sees in secret shall reward you openly. 28 Matthew 6:7 And whenever ye pray, be not babblers, as the heathen; for they think that by the 29 abundance of their words they shall be heard. Matthew 6:8 Then be not ye now like them: 30 for your Father knows your request before ye ask him. Luke 11:1b One of his disciples said 31 unto him, Our Lord, teach us to pray, as John taught his disciples. Luke 11:2a Jesus said unto 32 them, Thus now pray ye now: Matthew 6:9 Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be your 33, 34 name. Matthew 6:10 Your kingdom come. Your will be *done*, as in heaven, so on earth. Matthew 6:11 Give us the 35 food of today. Matthew 6:12 And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgave those that trespass *ed* 36 against us. Matthew 6:13 And bring us not into temptations, but deliver us from the evil one. For 37 yours is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Matthew 6:14 If you forgive [Arabic, p. 37] men their wrong-doing, your Father which is in heaven will forgive you. 38 Matthew 6:15 But if you forgive not men, neither will your Father pardon your wrong-doing.

39 Matthew 6:16 When ye fast, do not frown, as the hypocrites; for they make their faces austere, that they may be seen of men that they are fasting. Verily I say unto you, They 40 have received their reward. Matthew 6:17 But when you fast, wash your face and anoint your 41 head; Matthew 6:18 that you make not an appearance to men of fasting, but to your Father which is in secret: and your Father which sees in secret shall reward you.

42 Luke 12:32 Be not agitated, little flock; for your Father has delighted to give you the kingdom. 43 Luke 12:33a Sell your possessions, and give in alms; take to yourselves purses that wax 44 not old. Matthew 6:19 Lay not up treasure on earth, where moth and worm corrupt, and where 45 thieves break through and steal: Matthew 6:20 but lay up for yourselves treasure in heaven, where 46 moth and worm do not corrupt, nor thieves break through nor steal: Matthew 6:21 for where your 47 treasure is, there also will your heart be. Matthew 6:22 The lamp of the body is the eye: if then 48 your eye now be sound, your whole body also shall be light. Matthew 6:23 But if your eye be evil, all your body shall be dark. And if the light which is in you is darkness, how 49 great is your darkness! Luke 11:35 Be watchful that the light which is in you be not darkness. 50 Luke 11:36 Because that, if your whole body is light, and have no part dark, it shall all be light, as the lamp gives light to you with its flame.
