# Section 6

1 [Arabic, p. 22] Luke 5:8 But when Simon Cephas saw *this* he fell before the feet of Jesus, and said unto him, My Lord, I beseech of you to depart from me, for I am 2 a sinful man. Luke 5:9 And amazement took possession of him, and of all who were with him, 3 because of the draught of the fishes which they had taken. Luke 5:10 And thus also were James and John the sons of Zebedee overtaken, who were Simon's partners. And Jesus said 4 unto Simon, Fear not; henceforth you shall be a fisher of men unto life. Luke 5:11 And they brought the boats to the land; and they left everything, and followed him.

5 John 3:22 And after that came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judæa; and he went 6 about there with them, and baptized. John 3:23 And John also was baptizing in Ænon, which is beside Salim, because there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized. 7, 8 John 3:24 And John was not yet come into prison. John 3:25 And there was an inquiry between 9 one of John's disciples and one of the Jews about purifying. John 3:26 And they came unto John, and said unto him, Our master, he that was with you beyond Jordan, to whom 10 you have borne witness, behold, he also baptizes, and many come to him. John 3:27 John answered and said unto them, A man can receive nothing of himself, except it be 11 given him from heaven. John 3:28 You are they that bear witness unto me that I said, I am 12 not the Messiah, but I am one sent before him. John 3:29 And he that has a bride is a bridegroom: and the friend of the bridegroom is he that stands and listens to him, and rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom's voice. Lo now, behold, 13, 14 [Arabic, p. 23] my joy becomes complete. John 3:30 And he must increase and I decrease. John 3:31 For he that has come from above is higher than everything; and he that is of the earth, of the earth he is, and of the earth he speaks; and he that came down from heaven is 15 higher than all. John 3:32 And he bears witness of what he has seen and heard: and no man 16 receives his witness. John 3:33 And he that has received his witness has asserted that he is 17 truly God. John 3:34 And he whom God has sent speaks the words of God: God gave 18 not the Spirit by measure. John 3:35 The Father loves the Son, and has put everything in 19 his hands. John 3:36 Whosoever believes in the Son has eternal life; but whosoever obeys not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God comes upon him.

20 John 4:1 And Jesus learned that the Pharisees had heard that he had received many disciples, 21 and that he was baptizing more than John John 4:2 (not that Jesus was himself baptizing, 22 but his disciples); John 4:3a and *so* he left Judæa.

23 Luke 3:19 And Herod the governor, because he used to be rebuked by John because of Herodias the wife of Philip his brother, and for all the sins which he was committing, 24 added to all that also this, Luke 3:20 that he shut up John in prison.

25 Matthew 4:12 And when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he went away to Galilee. 26 John 4:46 And he entered again into Cana, where he had made the water wine. And there 27 was at Capernaum a king's servant, whose son was sick. John 4:47 And this *man* heard that Jesus had come from Judæa to Galilee; and he went to him, and besought of him that he would come down and heal his son; for he had come near unto death. 28, 29 John 4:48 Jesus said unto him, Unless you see signs and wonders, you do not believe. John 4:49 The [Arabic, p. 24] king's servant said unto him, My Lord, come down, that the child die not. 30 John 4:50 Jesus said unto him, Go; for your son is alive. And that man believed the 31 word which Jesus spoke, and went. John 4:51 And when he went down, his servants met him 32 and told him, and said unto him, Your son is alive. John 4:52 And he asked them at what time he recovered. They said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left 33 him. John 4:53 And his father knew that that was at that hour in which Jesus said unto him, 34 Your son is alive. John 4:54 And he believed, he and the whole people of his house. And this 35 is the second sign which Jesus did when he returned from Judæa to Galilee. Luke 4:44 And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.

36 Matthew 4:13 And he left Nazareth, and came and dwelt in Capernaum by the sea shore, in the 37 borders of Zebulun and Naphtali: Matthew 4:14 that it might be fulfilled which was said in Isaiah the prophet, who said,

> 38 Matthew 4:15 The land of Zebulun, the land of Naphtali,
> The way of the sea, the passage of the Jordan,
> Galilee of the nations:
> 39 Matthew 4:16 The people sitting in darkness
> Saw a great light,
> And those sitting in the region and in the shadow of death,
> There appeared to them a light.

40 Luke 4:31b And he taught them on the sabbaths. Luke 4:32 And they wondered because of his doctrine: 41 for his word was as if it were authoritative. Luke 4:33 And there was in the synagogue 42 a man with an unclean devil, and he cried out with a loud voice, and said, Luke 4:34 Let me alone; what have I to do with you, you Jesus of Nazareth? Are you come for our 43 destruction? I know you who you are, you Holy One of God. Luke 4:35 And Jesus rebuked him, and said, Stop up your mouth, and come out of him. And the demon threw him 44 in the midst and came out of him, having done him no harm. Luke 4:36 And great amazement [Arabic, p. 25] took hold upon every man. And they talked one with another, and said, What is this word that orders the unclean spirits with power and 45 authority, and they come out? Luke 4:37 And the news of him spread abroad in all the region which was around them.

46 Luke 4:38 And when Jesus went out of the synagogue, he saw a man sitting among the publicans, named Matthew: and he said unto him, Come after me. And he rose, and followed him.

47, 48 Mark 1:29b And Jesus came to the house of Simon and Andrew with James and John. Luke 4:38c And Simon's wife's mother was oppressed with a great fever, and they besought him for 49 her. Luke 4:39 And he stood over her and rebuked her fever, and it left her, and immediately 50 she rose and ministered to them. Matthew 8:16a And at even they brought to him many that had 51 demons: and he cast out their devils with the word. Luke 4:40b And all that had sick, their diseases being various *and* malignant, brought them unto him. And he laid his hand 52 on them one by one and healed them: Matthew 8:17 that that might be fulfilled which was said 53 in the prophet Isaiah, who said, He takes our pains and bears our diseases. Mark 1:33 And 54 all the city was gathered together unto the door of Jesus. Luke 4:41 And he cast out devils also from many, as they were crying out and saying, You are the Messiah, the Son of God; and he rebuked them. And he suffered not the demons to speak, because they knew him that he was the Lord the Messiah.
