# Section 5

1 Matthew 4:10 Jesus answered and said unto him, Get you hence, Satan: for it is written, You 2 shall worship the Lord your God, and him alone shall you serve. Luke 4:13 And when the 3 devil had completed all his temptations, he departed from him for a season. Matthew 4:11b And behold, the angels drew near and ministered unto him.

4, 5 John 1:35 And next day John was standing, and two of his disciples; John 1:36 and he saw Jesus as 6 he was walking, and said, Behold, the Lamb of God! John 1:37 And his two disciples heard 7 him saying *this*, and they followed Jesus. John 1:38 And Jesus turned and saw them coming after him, and said unto them, What do you seek? They said unto him, Our master, 8 where are you staying? John 1:39 And he said unto them, Come and see. And they came and saw his place, and abode with him that day: and it was about the tenth hour. 9 John 1:40 One of the two which heard from John, and followed Jesus, was Andrew the 10 brother of Simon. John 1:41a And he saw first Simon his brother, and said unto him, We have 11 found the Messiah. John 1:42a And he brought him unto Jesus. And Jesus looked upon him and said, You are Simon, son of Jonah: you shall be called Cephas.

12 John 1:43 And on the next day Jesus desired to go forth to Galilee, and he found Philip, 13 [Arabic, p. 19] and said unto him, Follow me. John 1:44 Now Philip was of Bethsaida, of the city 14 of Andrew and Simon. John 1:45 And Philip found Nathanael, and said unto him, He of whom Moses did write in the law and in the prophets, we have found that 15 he is Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth. John 1:46 Nathanael said unto him, Is it possible that there can be any good thing from Nazareth? Philip said unto him, Come and 16 see. John 1:47 And Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said of him, This is indeed a 17 son of Israel in whom is no guile. John 1:48 And Nathanael said unto him, Whence do you know me? Jesus said unto him, Before Philip called you, while you were under the 18 fig tree, I saw you. John 1:49 Nathanael answered and said unto him, My Master, you are 19 the Son of God; you are the King of Israel. John 1:50 Jesus said unto him, Because I said unto you, I saw you under the fig tree, have you believed? You shall see what is 20 greater than this. John 1:51 And he said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Henceforth you shall see the heavens opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.

21 Luke 4:14a And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee.

22 John 2:1 And on the third day there was a feast in Cana, a city of Galilee; and the 23 mother of Jesus was there: John 2:2 and Jesus also and his disciples were invited to the 24 feast. John 2:3 And they lacked wine: and his mother said unto Jesus, They have no wine. 25 John 2:4 And Jesus said unto her, What have I to do with you, woman? Has not mine 26 hour come? John 2:5 And his mother said unto the servants, What he says unto you, do. 27 John 2:6 And there were there six vessels of stone, placed for the Jews' purification, such as 28 [Arabic, p. 20] would contain two or three jars. John 2:7 And Jesus said unto them, Fill the vessels 29 with water. And they filled them to the top. John 2:8 He said unto them, Draw 30 out now, and present to the ruler of the feast. And they did *so*. John 2:9 And when the ruler of the company tasted that water which had become wine, and knew not whence it was (but the servants knew, because they filled up the water), the ruler of the company called 31 the bridegroom, John 2:10 and said unto him, Every man presents first the good wine, and on intoxication he brings what is poor; but you have kept the good wine until 32 now. John 2:11 And this is the first sign which Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and manifested 33 his glory; and his disciples believed on him. Luke 4:14b And his fame spread in all the country 34 which was around them. Luke 4:15 And he taught in their synagogues, and was glorified 35 by every man. Luke 4:16 And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and entered, according to his custom, into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood 36 up to read. Luke 4:17 And he was given the book of Isaiah the prophet. And Jesus opened the book and found the place where it was written,

> 37 Luke 4:18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
> And for this anointed he me, to preach good tidings to the poor;
> And he has sent me to heal the broken-hearted,
> And to proclaim forgiveness to the evil-doers, and sight to the blind,
> And to bring the broken into forgiveness,
> 38 Luke 4:19 And to proclaim an acceptable year of the Lord.

39 Luke 4:20 And he rolled up the book and gave it to the servant, and went and sat down: 40 and the eyes of all that were in the synagogue were observing him. Luke 4:21 And he began to say unto them, Today has this scripture been fulfilled which you have heard with 41 your ears. Luke 4:22a And they all bare him witness, and wondered at the words of grace which were proceeding from his mouth.

42 [Arabic, p. 21] Matthew 4:17a And from that time began Jesus to proclaim the gospel of the kingdom 43 of God, and to say, Repent ye, and believe in the gospel. Mark 1:15 The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of heaven has come near.

44 Matthew 4:18 And while he was walking on the shore of the sea of Galilee, he saw two brethren, Simon who was called Cephas, and Andrew his brother, casting their nets into 45 the sea; for they were fishers. Matthew 4:19 And Jesus said unto them, Follow me, and I will 46 make you fishers of men. Matthew 4:20 And they immediately left their nets there and followed 47 him. Matthew 4:21 And when he went on from thence, he saw other two brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the ship with Zebedee their father, mending 48 their nets; and Jesus called them. Matthew 4:22 And they immediately forsook the ship and their father Zebedee, and followed him.

49 Luke 5:1 And when the multitude gathered unto him to hear the word of God, while he 50 was standing on the shore of the sea of Gennesaret, Luke 5:2 he saw two boats standing beside the sea, while the two fishers which had gone out of them were washing their 51 nets. Luke 5:3 And one of them belonged to Simon Cephas. And Jesus went up and sat down in it, and commanded that they should move away a little from the land into 52 the water. And he sat down and taught the multitudes from the boat. Luke 5:4 And when he had left off his speaking, he said unto Simon, Put out into the deep, and cast your 53 net for a draught. Luke 5:5 And Simon answered and said unto him, My Master, we toiled 54 all night and caught nothing; now at your word I will cast the net. Luke 5:6 And when they did this, there were enclosed a great many fishes; and their net was on the 55 point of breaking. Luke 5:7 And they beckoned to their comrades that were in the other boat, to come and help them. And when they came, they filled both boats, so that they were on the point of sinking.
