# Section 7

1 [Arabic, p. 26] Mark 1:35 And in the morning of that day he went out very early, and went to a 2 desert place, and was there praying. Mark 1:36 And Simon and those that were with 3 him sought him. Mark 1:37 And when they found him, they said unto him, All the people seek for 4 you. Mark 1:38 He said unto them, Let us go into the adjacent villages and towns, that I may 5 preach there also; for to this end did I come. Luke 4:42 And the multitudes were seeking him, and came till they reached him; and they took hold of him, that he should not 6 go away from them. Luke 4:43 But Jesus said unto them, I must preach of the kingdom of 7 God in other cities also: for because of this gospel was I sent. Matthew 9:35 And Jesus was going about all the cities and the villages, and teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all the diseases and all the sicknesses, 8 Mark 1:39 and casting out the devils. Luke 4:14b And his fame became known Luke 4:15 that he was teaching in 9 every place and being glorified by every man. Mark 2:14 And when he passed by, he saw Levi the son of Alphæus sitting among the tax-gatherers; and he said unto him, Follow 10 me: and he rose and followed him. Matthew 4:24 And the news of him was heard of in all the land of Syria: and they brought unto him all those whom grievous ills had befallen through various diseases, and those that were enduring torment, and those that were possessed, and lunatics, and paralytics; and he healed them.

11, 12 Mark 2:1 And after some days Jesus entered into Capernaum again. Mark 2:2 And when they heard that he was in the house, many gathered, so that it could not hold them, even about 13 [Arabic, p. 27] the door; and he made known to them the word of God. Luke 5:17b And there were there some of the Pharisees and the teachers of the law, sitting, come from all the villages of Galilee, and Judæa, and Jerusalem; and the power of the Lord was 14 present to heal them. Luke 5:18 And some men brought a bed with a man on it who was paralytic. 15 And they sought to bring him in and lay him before him. Luke 5:19 And when they found no way to bring him in because of the multitude of people, they went up to the roof, and let him down with his bed from the roofing, into the midst before Jesus. 16 Luke 5:20 And when Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the paralytic, My son, your sins are forgiven 17 you. Luke 5:21 And the scribes and Pharisees began to think within their hearts, Why does this man blaspheme? Who is it that is able to forgive sins, but God alone? 18 Mark 2:8 And Jesus knew by the spirit that they were thinking this within themselves, and he 19 said unto them, Why do ye think this within your heart? Mark 2:9 Which is better, that it should be said to the paralytic, Your sins are forgiven you, or *that* it should be said 20 to him, Arise, and take your bed, and walk? Mark 2:10 That ye may know that the Son of man 21 is empowered on earth to forgive sins (and he said to the paralytic), Mark 2:11 I say unto you, 22 Arise, take your bed, and go to your house. Mark 2:12a And he rose immediately, and took his bed, and went out in the presence of all. Luke 5:25b And he went to his house praising God. 23 Matthew 9:8a And when those multitudes saw, they feared; Luke 5:26a and amazement took possession of 24 them, and they praised God, who had given such power to men. Luke 5:26c And they said, We have seen marvellous things today, Mark 2:12c of which we have never before seen the like.

25 [Arabic, p. 28] Luke 5:27 And after that, Jesus went out, and saw a publican, named Levi, sitting 26 among the publicans: and he said unto him, Follow me. Luke 5:28 And he left 27 everything, and rose, and followed him. Luke 5:29 And Levi made him a great feast in his house. And there was a great multitude of the publicans and others sitting with him. 28 Luke 5:30 And the scribes and Pharisees murmured, and said unto his disciples, Why do you eat 29 and drink with the publicans and sinners? Luke 5:31 Jesus answered and said unto them, The physician seeks not those who are well, but those that are afflicted with grievous 30, 31 sickness. Luke 5:32 I came not to call the righteous, but the sinners, to repentance. Luke 5:33 And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast always, and pray, and the 32 Pharisees also, but your disciples eat and drink? Luke 5:34 He said unto them, You cannot make 33 the sons of the marriage feast fast, while the bridegroom is with them. Luke 5:35 Days will come, when the bridegroom is taken away from them; then will they fast in those 34 days. Luke 5:36a And he spoke unto them a parable: Mark 2:21 No man inserts a new patch and sews it in a worn garment, lest the newness of the new take from the worn, and 35 there occur a great rent. Mark 2:22 And no man puts fresh wine into old skins, lest the wine burst the skins, and the skins be destroyed, and the wine spilled; but they put 36 the fresh wine in the new skins, and both are preserved. Luke 5:38-39 And no man drinks old wine and straightway desires fresh; for he says, The old is better.

37 Matthew 12:1 And while Jesus was walking on the sabbath day among the sown fields, his disciples [Arabic, p. 29] hungered. And they were rubbing the ears with their hands, and 38 eating. Matthew 12:2a But some of the Pharisees, when they saw them, Mark 2:24 said unto him, See, 39 why do your disciples on the sabbath day that which is not lawful? Mark 2:25 But Jesus said unto them, Have ye not read in olden time what David did, when he had need and 40 hungered, he and those that were with him? Mark 2:26 how he entered the house of God, when Abiathar was high priest, and ate the bread of the table of the Lord, which it was not lawful that any should eat, save the priests, and gave to them that were with him also? 41 Mark 2:27 And he said unto them, The sabbath was created because of man, and man was not 42 created because of the sabbath. Matthew 12:5 Or have ye not read in the law, that the priests in 43 the temple profane the sabbath, and *yet* they are blameless? Matthew 12:6 I say unto you now, 44 that here is what is greater than the temple. Matthew 12:7 If you had known *this*: I love mercy, 45 not sacrifice, you would not have condemned those on whom is no blame. Matthew 12:8 The 46 Lord of the sabbath is the Son of man. Mark 3:21 And his relatives heard, and went out to take him, and said, He has gone out of his mind.

47 Luke 6:6 And on the next sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and was teaching. 48 Luke 6:7 And there was there a man whose right hand was withered. And the scribes and the Pharisees were watching him, whether he would heal on the sabbath day, 49 that they might find the means of accusing him. Luke 6:8 But he knew their thoughts, and said unto the man whose hand was withered, Rise and come near into the midst of 50 the synagogue. Luke 6:9 And when he came and stood, Jesus said unto them, I ask you, which is lawful to be done on the sabbath day, good or evil? Shall lives be saved or 51 [Arabic, p. 30] destroyed? Mark 3:4b But they were silent. Mark 3:5 Regarding them with anger, being grieved because of the hardness of their hearts. And he said unto the man, Stretch out your hand. And he stretched it out: and his hand became straight. 52 Matthew 12:11 Then he said unto them, What man of you shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a 53 well on the sabbath day, will not take it and lift it out? Matthew 12:12 And how much is man better than a sheep! Wherefore it is lawful on the sabbath to do good.
