# Section 8

1 Matthew 12:14 And the Pharisees went out, and consulted together concerning him, that they 2 might destroy him. Matthew 12:15 And Jesus perceived, and removed thence: and great multitudes 3 followed him; and he healed all of them: Matthew 12:16 and he forbade them that they should 4 not make him known: Matthew 12:17 that the saying in Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which said,

> 5 Matthew 12:18 Behold, my servant with whom I am pleased;
> My beloved in whom my soul has delighted:
> My spirit have I put upon him,
> And he shall proclaim to the nations judgement.
> 6 Matthew 12:19 He shall not dispute, nor cry out;
> And no man shall hear his voice in the marketplace.
> 7 Matthew 12:20 And a bruised reed shall he not break,
> And a smoking lamp shall he not extinguish,
>
> 8 Matthew 12:21 And the nations shall rejoice in his name.

9 Luke 6:12 And in those days Jesus went out to the mountain that he might pray, and he 10 spent the night there in prayer to God. Luke 6:13a And when the morning had come, he called the disciples. Mark 3:7 And he went towards the sea: and there followed him much people 11 from Galilee that he might pray, Mark 3:8 and from Judæa, and from Jerusalem, and from Idumæa, and from beyond Jordan, and from Tyre, and from Sidon, and from Decapolis; 12 and great multitudes came unto him, which had heard what he did. Mark 3:9 And he spoke to his disciples to bring him the boat because of the multitudes, that they 13 might not throng him. Mark 3:10 And he healed many, so that they were almost falling on [Arabic, p. 31] him on account of their seeking to get near him. And those that had 14 plagues and unclean spirits, Mark 3:11 as soon as they beheld him, would fall, and 15 cry out, and say, You are the Son of God. Mark 3:12 And he rebuked them much, that they 16 should not make him known. Luke 6:18 And those that were under the constraint of unclean 17 spirits were healed. Luke 6:19 And all of the crowd were seeking to come near him; because power went out from him, and he healed them all.

18, 19 Matthew 5:1a And when Jesus saw the multitudes, he went up to the mountain. Luke 6:13b And he called his disciples, and chose from them twelve; and they are those whom he named 20 apostles: Luke 6:14 Simon, whom he named Cephas, and Andrew his brother, and James and 21 John, and Philip and Bartholomew, Luke 6:15 and Matthew and Thomas, and James the son 22 of Alphæus, and Simon which *was* called the Zealot, Luke 6:16 and Judas the son of James, 23 and Judas the Iscariot, being he that had betrayed him. Luke 6:17a And Jesus went down with them and stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and the great 24 multitude of people. Mark 3:14 And these twelve he chose to be with him, and that he might 25 send them to preach, and to have power to heal the sick and to cast out devils.

26 Luke 6:20 Then he lifted up his eyes unto them, and opened his mouth, Matthew 5:2 and taught them, and said,

27 Matthew 5:3 Blessed are the poor in spirit: for the kingdom of heaven is theirs.

28 Matthew 5:4 Blessed are the sorrowful: for they shall be comforted.

29 Matthew 5:5 Blessed are the humble: for they shall inherit the earth.

30 Matthew 5:6 Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be satisfied.

31 Matthew 5:7 Blessed are the merciful: for on them shall be mercy.

32 [Arabic, p. 32] Matthew 5:8 Blessed are the pure in their hearts: for they shall see God.

33 Matthew 5:9 Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the sons of God.

34 Matthew 5:10 Blessed are they that were persecuted for righteousness' sake: for the kingdom of heaven is theirs.

35 Luke 6:22a Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and separate you from them, and persecute you, and reproach you, Matthew 5:11b and shall speak against you with all evil talk, for my 36 sake, falsely. Matthew 5:12 Then rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets before you.

37 Luke 6:24 But woe unto you rich! For you have received your consolation.

38 Luke 6:25 Woe unto you that are satisfied! You shall hunger.

Woe unto you that laugh now! You shall weep and be sad.

39 Luke 5:26 Woe unto you when men praise you! For so did their fathers use to do to the false prophets.

40 Luke 6:27 Unto you do I say, *you* who hear, Matthew 5:13 You are the salt of the earth: if then the salt become tasteless, wherewith shall it be salted? For any purpose it is of no use, but 41 is thrown outside, and men tread upon it. Matthew 5:14 You are the light of the world. It is 42 impossible that a city built on a mountain should be hid. Matthew 5:15 Neither do they light a lamp and place it under a bushel, but on the lamp-stand, and it gives light to all 43 who are in the house. Matthew 5:16 So shall your light shine before men, that they may see 44 your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Mark 4:22 There is nothing 45 secret that shall not be revealed, or hidden that shall not be known. Mark 4:23 Whoever has ears that hear, let him hear.

46 Matthew 5:17 Think not that I came to destroy the law or the prophets; I came not to destroy, 47 but to complete. Matthew 5:18 Verily I say unto you, Until heaven and earth shall pass, there [Arabic, p. 33] shall not pass one point or one letter of the law, until all of it shall be 48 *accomplished*. Matthew 5:19 Every one who shall violate now one of these small commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called lacking in the kingdom of heaven: every one that shall do and teach shall be called great in the kingdom 49 of heaven. Matthew 5:20 I say unto you now, unless your righteousness abound more than that of the scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter the kingdom of heaven.

50 Matthew 5:21 You have heard that it was said to the ancients, Do not kill; and every one that 51 kills is worthy of the judgement. Matthew 5:22 But I say unto you that every one who is angry with his brother without a cause is worthy of the judgement; and every one that says to his brother, You foul one, is condemned by the synagogue; and whosoever 52 says to him, You fool, is worthy of the fire of Gehenna. Matthew 5:23 If you are now offering your gift at the altar, and rememberest there that your brother has conceived 53 against you any grudge, Matthew 5:24 leave your gift at the altar, and go first and satisfy your 54 brother, and then return and offer your gift. Matthew 5:25a Join your adversary quickly, Luke 12:58a and while you are still with him in the way, give a ransom and free yourself from him; 55 lest your adversary deliver you to the judge, Matthew 5:25c and the judge deliver you to the tax-collector, 56 and you fall into prison. Matthew 5:26 And verily I say unto you, You shall not go out thence until you pay the last farthing.

57, 58 Matthew 5:27 You have heard that it was said, Do not commit adultery: Matthew 5:28 but I now say unto you, that every one that looks at a woman lusting after her has immediately already 59 [Arabic, p. 34] committed adultery with her in his heart. Matthew 5:29 If your right eye injure you, put it out and cast it from you; for it is preferable for you that one of your 60 members should perish, and not your whole body go into the fire *of hell*. Matthew 5:30 And if your right hand injure you, cut it off and cast it from you; and it is better for you that 61 one of your members should perish, and not your whole body fall into Gehenna. Matthew 5:31 It was said that he that puts away his wife *should* give her a writing of divorcement: 62 Matthew 5:32 but I say unto you, that every one that puts away his wife, except for the cause of adultery, has made it lawful for her to commit adultery: and whosoever takes one that is put away commits adultery.
