# Section 17

1 Matthew 13:24 And he set forth to them another parable, and said, The kingdom of heaven is 2 like a man who sowed good seed in his field; Matthew 13:25 but when men slept, his enemy came 3 and sowed tares among the wheat, and went away. Matthew 13:26 And when the blade sprang up 4 and brought forth fruit, there were noticed the tares also. Matthew 13:27 And the servants of the master of the house came, and said unto him, Our lord, did you not sow good 5 [Arabic, p. 66] seed in your field? Whence are there tares in it? Matthew 13:28 He said unto them, An enemy has done this. His servants said unto him, Will you that we go 6 and separate it? Matthew 13:29 He said unto them, Perhaps, when you separate the tares, you would 7 root up with them wheat also. Matthew 13:30 Leave them to grow both together until the harvest: and in the time of the harvest I will say unto the reapers, Separate the tares first, and bind them in bundles to be burned with fire; and gather the wheat into my barns.

8, 9 Matthew 13:31a And he set forth to them another parable, and said, Luke 13:18b To what is the kingdom of 10 God like? And to what shall I liken it? And in what parable shall I set it forth? It 11 is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and planted in his field: and of the number of the things that are sown in the earth it is smaller than all of the things 12 which are sown, which are upon the earth; but when it is grown, it is greater than all the herbs, and produces large branches, so that the birds of heaven make *their* nests in its branches.

13, 14 And he set forth to them another parable: Luke 13:20b To what shall I liken the kingdom of 15 God? Matthew 13:33b It is like the leaven which a woman took, and kneaded into three measures of flour, until the whole of it was leavened.

16 And Jesus spoke all that to the multitudes by way of parables, according as they 17 were able to hear. And without parables spoke he not unto them; that the saying of the Lord through the prophet might be fulfilled:

> I will open my mouth in parables;
> And I will utter secrets which were before the foundations of the world.

18 Mark 4:34b But he explained to his disciples privately everything.

19 Matthew 13:36 Then Jesus left the multitudes, and came to the house. And his disciples came unto him, and said unto him, Explain unto us that parable about the tares 20 [Arabic, p. 67] and the field. Matthew 13:37 He answered and said unto them, He that sowed good seed is 21 the Son of man; Matthew 13:38 and the field is the world; and the good seed are the children of the 22 kingdom; Matthew 13:39 and the tares are the children of the evil one; and the enemy that sowed them is Satan; and the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels. 23 Matthew 13:40 And as the tares are separated and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of 24 this world. Matthew 13:41 The Son of man shall send his angels, and separate from his kingdom 25 all things that injure, Matthew 13:42 and all the doers of iniquity, and they shall cast them into the 26 furnace of fire: and there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matthew 13:43 Then the righteous shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Whosoever has ears that hear, let him hear.

27 Matthew 13:44 And again the kingdom of heaven is like treasure hid in a field: that which a man found and hid; and, for his pleasure in it, went and sold all that he had, and bought that field.

28 Matthew 13:45 And again the kingdom of heaven is like a man *that is* a merchant seeking excellent 29 pearls; Matthew 13:46 and when he found one pearl of great price, he went and sold everything that he had, and bought it.

30 Matthew 13:47 And again the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was cast into the sea, and 31 gathered of every kind: Matthew 13:48 and when it was filled, they drew it up on to the shore of the sea, and sat down to select; and the good of them they threw into the vessels, 32 and the bad they threw outside. Matthew 13:49 Thus shall it be in the end of the world: the angels 33 shall go forth, Matthew 13:50 and separate the wicked from among the good, and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

34 Matthew 13:51 Jesus said unto them, Have ye understood all these *things?* They said unto 35 [Arabic, p. 68] him, Yea, our Lord. Matthew 13:52 He said unto them, Therefore every scribe that becomes a disciple of the kingdom of heaven is like a man that is a householder, who brings out of his treasures the new and the old.

36, 37 Matthew 13:53 And when Jesus had finished all these parables, he removed thence, and came to his city; Matthew 13:54 and he taught them in their synagogues, so that they were perplexed. 38 Mark 6:2 And when the sabbath came, Jesus began to teach in the synagogue; and many of 39 those that heard marvelled, and said, Whence came these things to this *man?* And many envied him and gave no heed to him, but said, What is this wisdom that is given to this *man*, that there should happen at his hands such as these mighty works? 40 Matthew 13:55 Is not this a carpenter, son of a carpenter? And is not his mother called Mary? And 41 his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? Matthew 13:56 And his sisters, all of them, 42 lo, are they not all with us? Matthew 13:57 Whence has this *man* all these things? And they were in doubt concerning him. Luke 4:23 And Jesus knew their opinion, and said unto them, Will ye haply say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal first yourself: and all that 43 we have heard that you did in Capernaum, do here also in your *own* city? Luke 4:24 And he said, Verily I say unto you, A prophet is not received in his *own* city, nor among 44 his brethren: Mark 6:4b for a prophet is not despised, save in his *own* city, and among his *own* 45 kin, and in his *own* house. Luke 4:25 Verily I say unto you, In the days of Elijah the prophet, there were many widows among the children of Israel, when the heaven held back 46 three years and six months, Luke 4:26 and there was a great famine in all the land; and Elijah [Arabic, p. 69] was not sent to one of them, save to Zarephath of Sidon, to a woman that was 47 a widow. Luke 4:27 And many lepers were among the children of Israel in the days of Elisha the prophet; but not one of them was cleansed, save Naaman the Nabathæan. 48 Mark 6:5 And he was not able to do there many mighty works, because of their unbelief; 49 except that he laid his hand upon a few of the sick, and healed *them*. Mark 6:6a And he marvelled 50 at their lack of faith. Luke 4:28 And when those who were in the synagogue heard, 51 they were all filled with wrath; and they rose up, Luke 4:29 and brought him forth outside the city, and brought him to the brow of the hill upon which their city was built, that 52 they might cast him from its summit: Luke 4:30 but he passed through among them and went away.

53 Mark 6:6b And he went about in the villages which *were* around Nazareth, and taught in their synagogues.
