# Section 10

1 [Arabic, p. 38] Matthew 6:24 No man can serve two masters; and that because it is necessary that he hate one of them and love the other, and honour one of them and despise the 2 other. Matthew 6:25 You cannot serve God and possessions. And because of this I say unto you, Be not anxious for yourselves, what you shall eat and what you shall drink; neither for your bodies, what you shall put on. Is not the life better than the food, and the body 3 than the raiment? Matthew 6:26 Consider the birds of the heaven, which sow not, nor reap, nor store in barns; and *yet* your Father which is in heaven feeds them. Are you not 4 better than they? Matthew 6:27 Who of you when he tries is able to add to his stature one 5 cubit? Luke 12:26 If then you are not able for a small *thing*, why are you anxious about the 6, 7 rest? Matthew 6:28 Consider the wild lily, how it grows, although it toils not, nor spins; Matthew 6:29 and I say unto you that Solomon in the greatness of his glory was not clothed like one of 8 them. Matthew 6:30 And if God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow 9 is cast into the oven, how much more shall be unto you, O you of little faith! Matthew 6:31 Be not anxious, so as to say, What shall we eat? Or, What shall we drink? Or, With 10 what shall we be clothed? Luke 12:29b Neither let your minds be perplexed in this: Matthew 6:32 all these *things* the nations of the world seek; and your Father which is in heaven knows 11 your need of all these things. Matthew 6:33 Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; 12 [Arabic, p. 39] and all these shall come to you as something additional for you. Matthew 6:34 Be not anxious for the morrow; for the morrow shall be anxious for what belongs to it. Sufficient unto the day is its evil.

13 Matthew 7:1 Judge not, that you be not judged: Luke 6:37b condemn not, that you be not condemned: 14 Luke 6:38 forgive, *and* it shall be forgiven you: release, and you shall be released: give, that you may be given *unto*; with good measure, abundant, full, they shall thrust into your 15 bosoms. Mark 4:24b With what measure ye measure it shall be measured to you. See *to it* what ye hear: with what measure ye measure it shall be measured to you; and you 16 shall be given more. Mark 4:25 I say unto those that hear, He that has shall be given *unto*; and he that has not, that which he regards as his shall be taken from him.

17 Luke 6:39 And he spoke unto them a parable, Can a blind man haply guide a blind man? 18 shall they not both fall into a hollow? Luke 6:40 A disciple is not better than his master; 19 every perfect man shall be as his master. Luke 6:41 Why do you look at the mote which is in the eye of your brother, but considerest not the column that is in your *own* eye? 20 Luke 6:42 Or how can you say to your brother, Brother, I will take out the mote from your eye; and the column which is in your eye you see not? You hypocrite, take out first the column from your eye; and then shall you see to take out the mote from the eye of your brother.

21 Matthew 7:6 Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast your pearls before the swine, lest they trample them with their feet, and return and wound you.

22 Luke 11:5 And he said unto them, Who of you, that has a friend, goes to him at midnight, 23 and says unto him, My friend, lend me three loaves; Luke 11:6 for a friend has come 24 to me from a journey, and I have nothing to offer to him: Luke 11:7 and that friend shall [Arabic, p. 40] answer him from within, and say unto him, Trouble me not; for the door is shut, and my children are with me in bed, and I cannot rise and give you? 25 Luke 11:8 And verily I say unto you, If he will not give him because of friendship, yet because 26 of *his* importunity he will rise and give him what he seeks. Luke 11:9 And I also say unto you, Ask, *and* you shall be given *unto*; seek, *and* you shall find; knock, *and* it shall be 27 opened unto you. Luke 11:10 Every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and 28 he that knocks, it shall be opened to him. Luke 11:11 What father of you, shall his son ask for bread— will he, think you, give him a stone? and if he ask of him a fish, will he, 29 think you, Luke 11:12 instead of the fish give him a serpent? And if he ask him for an egg, will 30 he, think you, extend to him a scorpion? Luke 11:13 If you then, *although* being evil, know the gifts *which are* good, and give them to your children, how much more shall your 31 Father which is in heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Matthew 7:12 Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: this is the law and the prophets.

32 Matthew 7:13 Enter ye by the narrow gate; for the wide gate and the broad way lead to destruction, 33 and many they be which go therein. Matthew 7:14 How narrow is the gate and straitened the way leading to life! And few be they that find it.

34 Matthew 7:15 Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, while within 35 they are ravening wolves. Matthew 7:16a But by their fruits you shall know them. Luke 6:44 For every tree is known by its fruit. For figs are not gathered of thorns, neither are grapes plucked of 36 briers. Matthew 7:17 Even so every good tree brings forth good fruit, but the evil tree brings 37 [Arabic, p. 41] forth evil fruit. Matthew 7:18 The good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither *can* the 38 evil tree bring forth good fruit. Luke 6:45 The good man from the good treasures that are in his heart brings forth good *things*; and the evil man from the evil treasures that are in his heart brings forth evil *things*: and from the overflowings of the 39 heart the lips speak. Matthew 7:19 Every tree that bears not good fruit is cut *down* and cast 40, 41 into the fire. Matthew 7:20 Therefore by their fruits you shall know them. Matthew 7:21 Not all that say unto me, My Lord, my Lord, shall enter the kingdom of the heavens; but he that does 42 the will of my Father which is in heaven. Matthew 7:22 Many shall say unto me in that day, My Lord, my Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and in your name cast out 43 devils, and in your name do many powers? Matthew 7:23 Then shall I say unto them, I never 44 knew you: depart from me, you servants of iniquity. Luke 6:47 Every man that comes unto 45 me, and hears my sayings, and does them, I will show you to what he is like: Luke 6:48 he is like the wise man which built a house, and dug and went deep, and laid the 46 foundations on a rock: Matthew 7:25 and the rain came down, and the rivers overflowed, and the winds blew, and shook that house, and it fell not: for its foundation was laid on 47 rocks. Matthew 7:26 And every one that hears these my words, and does them not, is like 48 the foolish man which built his house on sand, without foundation: Matthew 7:27 and the rain descended, and the rivers overflowed, and the winds blew, and smote upon that house, and it fell: and the fall of it was great.
