# Section 15

1 Luke 7:40 Jesus answered and said unto him, Simon, I have something to say unto you. And 2 he said unto him, Say *on*, my Master. Luke 7:41 Jesus said unto him, There were two debtors [Arabic, p. 58] to one creditor; and one of them owed five hundred pence, and the other 3 owed fifty pence. Luke 7:42 And because they had not wherewith to pay, he forgave 4 them both. Which of them ought to love him more? Luke 7:43 Simon answered and said, I suppose, he to whom he forgave most. Jesus said unto him, You have judged rightly. 5 Luke 7:44 And he turned to that woman, and said to Simon, Do you see this woman? I entered into your dwelling, and you gave me not water to wash my feet: but this 6 *woman* has bathed my feet with her tears, and dried them with her hair. Luke 7:45 And you kissed me not: but this *woman*, since she entered, has not ceased to kiss my 7 feet. Luke 7:46 And you anointed not my head with oil: but this *woman* has anointed 8 my feet with sweet ointment. Luke 7:47 And for this, I say unto you, Her many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much; for he to whom little is forgiven loves little. 9, 10 Luke 7:48 And he said unto that woman, Your sins are forgiven you. Luke 7:49 And those that were invited 11 began to say within themselves, Who is this that forgives sins also? Luke 7:50 And Jesus said to that woman, Your faith has saved you; go in peace.

12 John 2:23b And many believed in him when they saw the signs which he was doing. 13, 14 John 2:24 But Jesus did not trust himself to them, John 2:25 for he knew every man, and he needed not any man to testify to him concerning every man; for he knew what was in man.

15 Luke 10:1 And after that, Jesus set apart from his disciples other seventy, and sent them two and two before his face to every region and city whither he was purposing to 16 go. Luke 10:2 And he said unto them, The harvest is abundant, and the labourers are few: 17 entreat now the Lord of the harvest, that he send forth labourers into his harvest. Luke 10:3 Go 18 [Arabic, p. 59] ye: and lo, I am sending you as lambs among wolves. Luke 10:4 Take not with you 19 purses, nor a wallet, nor shoes; neither salute any man in the way. Luke 10:5 And 20 whatsoever house ye enter, first salute that house: Luke 10:6 and if there be there a son of peace, 21 let your peace rest upon him; but if there be not, your peace shall return to you. Luke 10:7 And be ye in that house eating and drinking what they have: for the labourer is worthy of 22 his hire. Luke 10:8 And remove not from house to house. And into whatsoever city ye enter, 23 and they receive you, eat what is presented to you: Luke 10:9 and heal the sick that are 24 therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God has come near unto you. Luke 10:10 But whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go out into the market, and say, 25 Luke 10:11 Even the dust that clave to our feet from your city, we shake off against you; but 26 know this, that the kingdom of God has come near unto you. Luke 10:12 I say unto you, that for Sodom there shall be quiet in the day of judgement, but there shall not be for 27 that city. Matthew 11:20 Then began Jesus to rebuke the cities in which there had been many 28 mighty works, and they repented not. Matthew 11:21 And he said, Woe unto you, Chorazin! Woe unto you, Bethsaida! If there had been in Tyre and Sidon the signs which were in 29 you, it may be that they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes. Matthew 11:22 Howbeit I say unto you, that for Tyre and Sidon there shall be rest in the day of judgement, 30 more than for you. Matthew 11:23 And you, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shall sink down unto Hades; for if there had been in Sodom the wonders which were 31 in you, it would have remained until this day. Matthew 11:24 And now I say unto you, that for the land of Sodom there shall be quiet in the day of judgement, more than for you.

32 [Arabic, p. 60] Luke 10:16 And he said again unto his apostles, Whosoever hears you hears me; and whosoever hears me hears him that sent me: and whosoever wrongs you wrongs me; and whosoever wrongs me wrongs him that sent me.

33 Luke 10:17 And those seventy returned with great joy, and said unto him, Our Lord, even 34 the devils also are subject unto us in your name. Luke 10:18 He said unto them, I beheld 35 Satan fallen like lightning from heaven. Luke 10:19 Behold, I am giving you authority to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and the whole race of the enemy; and nothing shall 36 hurt you. Luke 10:20 Only ye must not rejoice that the devils are subject unto you; but be glad that your names are written in heaven.

37 Luke 10:21 And in that hour Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and said, I acknowledge you, my Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you hid these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them unto children: yea, my Father; so 38 was your will. Luke 10:22 And he turned to his disciples, and said unto them, Everything has been delivered to me of my Father: and no man knows who the Son is, save the Father; and who the Father is, save the Son, and to whomsoever the Son wills 39 to reveal *him*. Matthew 11:28 Come unto me, all of you, you *that are* wearied and bearers of burdens, 40 and I will give you rest. Matthew 11:29 Bear my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I 41 am gentle and lowly in my heart: and you shall find rest unto your souls. Matthew 11:30 For my yoke is pleasant, and my burden is light.

42 Luke 14:25 And while great multitudes were going with him, he turned, and said unto them, 43 Luke 14:26 Whosoever comes unto me, and hates not his father, and his mother, and his brethren, and his sisters, and his wife, and his children, and himself also, cannot 44 [Arabic, p. 61] be a disciple to me. Luke 14:27 And whosoever does not take his cross, and follow 45 me, cannot be a disciple to me. Luke 14:28 Which of you desires to build a tower, and does not sit down first and reckon his expenses and whether he has *enough* to 46 complete it? Luke 14:29 lest when he has laid the foundations, and is not able to finish, all that 47 behold him laugh at him, and say, Luke 14:30 This man began to build, and was not able to 48 finish. Luke 14:31 Or what king goes to the battle to fight with another king, and does not consider first whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him that comes to him 49 with twenty thousand? Luke 14:32 And if he is not able, he sends unto him while he is afar 50 off, and seeks peace. Luke 14:33 So shall every man of you consider, that desires to be a disciple to me; for if he renounces not all that he has, he cannot be a disciple to me.
