# Section 12

1 Luke 8:37a And all the multitude of the Gadarenes entreated him to depart from them, because that great fear took hold upon them.

2, 3 Matthew 9:1 But Jesus went up into the ship, and crossed, and came to his city. Luke 8:38 And that man from whom the devils went out entreated that he might stay with him; but 4 Jesus sent him away, and said unto him, Luke 8:39a Return to your house, and make known what 5 God has done for you. Mark 5:20 And he went, and began to publish in Decapolis what Jesus had done for him; and they all marvelled.

6 And when Jesus had crossed in the ship to that side, a great multitude received 7 him; and they were all looking for him. Luke 8:41a And a man named Jairus, the chief of the 8 synagogue, fell before the feet of Jesus, Mark 5:23a and besought him much, and said unto him, I have an only daughter, and she has come near unto death; Matthew 9:18b but come and lay your 9 hand upon her, and she shall live. Matthew 9:19 And Jesus rose, and his disciples, and they followed 10 him. Mark 5:24b And there joined him a great multitude, and they pressed him.

11, 12 Mark 5:25 And a woman, which had a flow of blood for twelve years, Mark 5:26 *had* suffered much of many physicians, and spent all that she had, and was not benefited at all, but her 13 trouble increased further. Mark 5:27 And when she heard of Jesus, she came in the thronging of 14 [Arabic, p. 47] the crowd behind him, and touched his garments; Mark 5:28 and she thought within 15 herself, If I *could* reach to touch his garments, I should live. Mark 5:29 And immediately the fountain of her blood was dried; and she felt in her body that she was healed 16 of her plague. Mark 5:30 And Jesus straightway knew within himself that power had gone out of him; and he turned to the crowd, and said, Who approached unto my garments? 17 Luke 8:45b And on their denying, all of them, Simon Cephas and those with him said unto him, Our Master, the multitudes throng you and press you, and do you say, Who approached 18 unto me? Luke 8:46 And he said, Some one approached unto me; and I knew that 19 power went forth from me. Luke 8:47a And that woman, when she saw that she was not hid 20 from him, came fearing and agitated (for she knew what had happened to her), and fell down and worshipped him, and told, in the presence of all the people, for what 21 reason she touched *him*, and how she was healed immediately. And Jesus said unto her, Be of good courage, daughter; your faith has made you alive; depart in peace, and be whole from your plague.

22 Luke 8:49 And while he was yet speaking, there came a man from the house of the chief of the synagogue, and said unto him, Your daughter has died; so trouble not the 23 teacher. Luke 8:50 But Jesus heard, and said unto the father of the maid, Fear not: but believe 24 only, and she shall live. Mark 5:37 And he suffered no man to go with him, except 25 Simon Cephas, and James, and John the brother of James. Mark 5:38 And they reached the house of the chief of the synagogue; and he saw them agitated, weeping and wailing. 26 Mark 5:39 And he entered, and said unto them, Why are you agitated *and* weeping? The 27 [Arabic, p. 48] maid has not died, but she is sleeping. Luke 8:53 And they laughed at him, for 28 they knew that she had died. Mark 5:40b And he put every man forth without, and took the father of the maid, and her mother, and Simon, and James, and John, and 29 entered into the place where the maid was laid. Mark 5:41 And he took hold of the hand of the maid, and said unto her, Maid, arise. Luke 8:55a And her spirit returned, and straightway 30 she arose and walked: Mark 5:42b and she was about twelve years *of age*. Luke 8:55b And he commanded 31 that there should be given to her something to eat. Luke 8:56 And her father wondered greatly: 32 and he warned them that they should tell no man what had happened. Matthew 9:26 And this report spread in all that land.

33 Matthew 9:27 And when Jesus crossed over from there, there joined him two blind men, crying 34 out, and saying, Have mercy on us, *you* son of David. Matthew 9:28 And when he came to the house, those two blind men came to him: and Jesus said unto them, Believe ye 35 that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, our Lord. Matthew 9:29 Then he touched 36 their eyes, and said, As you have believed, it shall be unto you. Matthew 9:30 And immediately their eyes were opened. And Jesus forbade them, and said, See that no man know. 37 Matthew 9:31 But they went out and published the news in all that land.

38 Matthew 9:32 And when Jesus went out, they brought to him a dumb man having a devil. 39 Matthew 9:33 And on the going out of the devil that dumb man spoke. And the multitudes marvelled, and said, It was never so seen in Israel

40 Matthew 9:35 And Jesus was going about in all the cities and *in* the villages, and teaching in their synagogues, and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease 41 [Arabic, p. 49] and sickness; and many followed him. Matthew 9:36 And when Jesus saw the multitudes, he had compassion on them, for they were wearied and scattered, as sheep 42 that have no shepherd. And he called his twelve disciples, and gave them power and 43 much authority over all devils and diseases; Luke 9:2 and sent them two and two, that they 44 might proclaim the kingdom of God, and *to* heal the sick. Matthew 10:5 And he charged them, and said, Walk not in the way of the heathen, nor enter into the cities of the Samaritans. 45, 46 Matthew 10:6 Go especially unto the sheep that are lost of the sons of Israel. Matthew 10:7 And 47 when you go, proclaim and say, The kingdom of heaven has come near. Matthew 10:8 And heal the sick, and cleanse the lepers, and cast out the devils: freely you have received, freely 48, 49 give. Matthew 10:9f Get you not gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses; and take nothing for the way, except a staff only; nor bag, nor bread; neither shall you have two tunics, 50 nor shoes, nor staff, but be shod with sandals; for the labourer is worthy of his food. 51 Matthew 10:10d And whatever city or village ye enter, inquire who is worthy in it, and there be until 52, 53 ye go out. Matthew 10:11 And when you enter into the house, ask for the peace of the house: and if the house is worthy, your peace shall come upon it; but if it is not worthy, your 54 peace shall return unto you. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your sayings, when you go out from that house, or from that village, shake off the dust 55 [Arabic, p. 50] that is under your feet against them for a testimony. Matthew 10:15 And verily I say unto you, To the land of Sodom and Gomorrha there shall be rest in the day of judgement, rather than to that city.
