# Section 18

1 At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus, and all the things which came to pass at his hand; Mark 6:14b and he marvelled, for he had obtained excellent 2 information concerning him. Luke 9:7c And *some* men said that John the Baptist was risen 3 from among the dead; and others said that Elijah had appeared; and others, Jeremiah; 4 and others, that a prophet of the old prophets was risen; and others said that he 5 was a prophet like one of the prophets. Herod said to his servants, This is John the Baptist, he whom I beheaded; he is risen from among the dead: therefore mighty 6 [Arabic, p. 70] works result from him. Mark 6:17 For Herod him *self* had sent and taken John, and cast him into prison, for the sake of Herodias his brother Philip's wife, whom he 7 had taken. Mark 6:18 And John said to Herod, You have no authority to take the wife of your 8 brother. Mark 6:19 And Herodias avoided him and wished to kill him; and she could not. 9 Mark 6:20 But Herod feared John, for he knew that he was a righteous man *and* a holy; and 10 he guarded him, and heard him much, and did, and obeyed him with gladness. Matthew 14:5 And he wished to kill him; but he feared the people, for they adhered to him as the 11 prophet. Mark 6:21 And there was a celebrated day, and Herod had made a feast for his great men on the day of his anniversary, and for the officers and for the chief men 12 of Galilee. Mark 6:22 And the daughter of Herodias came in and danced in the midst of the company, and pleased Herod and those that sat with him. And the king said to the 13 damsel, Ask of me what you will, and I will give it you. Mark 6:23 And he swore unto her, 14 Whatsoever you shall ask, I will give it you, to the half of my kingdom. Mark 6:24 And she went out, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask him? She said unto her, The 15 head of John the Baptist. Mark 6:25 And immediately she came in hastily to the king, and said unto him, I desire in this hour that you give me on a dish the head of John 16 the Baptist. Mark 6:26 And the king was exceeding sorry; but because of the oath and the 17 guests he did not wish to refuse her. Mark 6:27 But immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded that he should bring the head of John: and he went and cut off 18 the head of John in the prison, Mark 6:28 and brought it on a dish, and delivered it to the 19 damsel; and the damsel gave it to her mother. Mark 6:29 And his disciples heard, and came [Arabic, p. 71] and took his body, and buried it. Matthew 14:12b And they came and told Jesus what 20 had happened. Luke 9:9 And for this cause Herod said, I beheaded John: who 21 is this, of whom I hear these things. And he desired to see him. And Jesus, when he heard, removed thence in a boat to a waste place alone, to the other side of the sea of the Galilee of Tiberias.

22 Mark 6:33a And many saw them going, and knew them, and hastened by land from all the cities, and came there beforehand; John 6:2b for they saw the signs which he was doing on the 23, 24 sick. John 6:3 And Jesus went up into the mountain, and sat there with his disciples. John 6:4 And 25 the feast of the passover of the Jews was near. John 6:5a And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and saw great multitudes coming to him. Mark 6:34b And he was moved with compassion for them, for 26 they were like sheep that *were* without a shepherd. Luke 9:11b And he received them, and spoke to them concerning the kingdom of God, and healed those who had need of healing.

27 Matthew 14:15a And when the evening approached, his disciples came to him, and said unto 28 him, Mark 6:36 The place is desert, and the time is past; send away the multitudes of the people, that they may go to the towns and villages which are around us, and buy for 29 themselves bread; for they have nothing to eat. Matthew 14:16 But he said unto them, They have 30 no need to go away; give ye them what may be eaten. Matthew 14:17a They said unto him, We have not here *enough*. John 6:5b He said unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat? 31, 32 John 6:6 And he said that proving him; and he knew what he was resolved to do. John 6:7 Philip said [Arabic, p. 72] unto him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread would not suffice them after 33 every one of them has taken a small amount. John 6:8 One of his disciples said unto 34 him (namely, Andrew the brother of Simon Cephas), John 6:9 Here is a lad having five loaves 35 of barley and two fishes: but this amount, what is it for all these? But will you that we go and buy for all the people what may be eaten? For we have no more 36 than these five loaves and the two fishes. And the grass was plentiful in that place. Jesus said unto them, Arrange all the people that they may sit down on the grass, 37 fifty people in a company. Mark 6:40 And the disciples did so. And all the people sat down 38 by companies, by hundreds and fifties. Matthew 14:18 Then Jesus said unto them, Bring hither 39 those five loaves and the two fishes. Mark 6:41a And when they brought him that, Jesus took the bread and the fish, and looked to heaven, and blessed, and divided, and gave to 40 his disciples to set before them; Matthew 14:19b and the disciples set for the multitudes the bread 41 and the fish; and they ate, all of them, and were satisfied. And when they were satisfied, he said unto his disciples, Gather the fragments that remain over, that nothing 42 be lost. John 6:13 And they gathered, and filled twelve baskets with fragments, being those that remained over from those which ate of the five barley loaves and the two 43 fishes. Matthew 14:21 And those people who ate were five thousand, besides the women and children. 44 [Arabic, p. 73] Mark 6:45 And straightway he pressed his disciples to go up into the ship, and that they should go before him unto the other side to Bethsaida, while he 45 him *self* should send away the multitudes. John 6:14 And those people who saw the sign which 46 Jesus did, said, Of a truth this is a prophet who has come into the world. John 6:15 And Jesus knew their purpose to come and take him, and make him a king; and he left them, and went up into the mountain alone for prayer.

47, 48 John 6:16 And when the nightfall was near, his disciples went down unto the sea, and sat in a boat, and came to the side of Capernaum. John 6:17 And the darkness came on, and Jesus 49 had not come to them. John 6:18 And the sea was stirred up against them by reason of a violent 50 wind that blew. Matthew 14:24 And the boat was distant from the land many furlongs, and they were much damaged by the waves, and the wind was against them.
