# Section 19

1 Matthew 14:25 And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus came unto them, walking upon the 2 water, after they had rowed with difficulty about twenty-five or thirty furlongs. 3 Matthew 14:26 And when he drew near unto their boat, his disciples saw him walking on the water; and they were troubled, and supposed that it was a false appearance; and they cried 4 out from their fear. Matthew 14:27 But Jesus straightway spoke unto them, and said, Take courage, 5 for it is I; fear not. Matthew 14:28 Then Cephas answered and said unto him, My Lord, if it be you, 6 bid me to come unto you on the water. Matthew 14:29 And Jesus said unto him, Come. And 7 Cephas went down out of the boat, and walked on the water to come unto Jesus. Matthew 14:30 But [Arabic, p. 74] when he saw the wind strong, he feared, and was on the point of sinking; 8 and he lifted up his voice, and said, My Lord, save me. Matthew 14:31 And immediately our Lord stretched out his hand and took *hold of* him, and said unto him, 9 You of little faith, why did you doubt? Matthew 14:32 And when Jesus came near, he went up 10 unto them into the boat, he and Simon, and immediately the wind ceased. Matthew 14:33 And those that were in the ship came and worshipped him, and said, Truly you are the 11 Son of God. John 6:21b And straightway that ship arrived at the land which they made for. 12 And when they came out of the ship to the land, they marvelled greatly and were 13 perplexed in themselves: Mark 6:52 and they had not understood by means of that bread, because their heart was gross.

14 And when the people of that region knew of the arrival of Jesus, they made haste in all that land, and began to bring those that were diseased, borne in their 15 beds to the place where they heard that he was. Mark 6:56 And wheresoever the place *might be* which he entered, of the villages or the cities, they laid the sick in the markets, and sought of him that they might touch were it only the edge of his garment: and all that touched him were healed and lived.

16 John 6:22a And on the day after that, the multitude which was standing on the shore of the sea saw that there was there no other ship save that into which the disciples had 17 gone up, John 6:23 and that Jesus went not up into the ship with his disciples (but there were other ships from Tiberias near the place where they ate the bread when Jesus blessed 18 *it*): John 6:24 and when that multitude saw that Jesus was not there, nor yet his disciples, they 19 [Arabic, p. 75] went up into those ships, and came to Capernaum, and sought Jesus. John 6:25 And when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him, Our 20 Master, when did you come here? John 6:26 Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, You have not sought me because of your seeing the signs, but because of 21 your eating the bread and being satisfied. John 6:27 Serve not the food which perishes, but the food which abides in eternal life, which the Son of man will give unto you: him 22 has God the Father sealed. John 6:28 They said unto him, What shall we do that we may 23 work the work of God? John 6:29 Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of 24 God, that you believe in him whom he has sent. John 6:30 They said unto him, What sign have you done, that we may see, and believe in you? What have you wrought? 25 John 6:31 Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness; as it was written, Bread from heaven 26 gave he them to eat. John 6:32 Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not bread from 27 heaven; but my Father gave you the bread of truth from heaven. John 6:33 The bread of God is that which came down from heaven and gave the 28, 29 world life. John 6:34 They said unto him, Our Lord, give us at all times this bread. John 6:35 Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: whosoever comes unto me shall not hunger, 30 and whosoever believes in me shall not thirst for ever. John 6:36 But I said unto you, 31 You have seen me, and have not believed. John 6:37 And all that my Father has given to me comes unto me; and whosoever comes unto me I shall not cast him forth without. 32 John 6:38 I came down from heaven, not to do my *own* will, but to do the will of him 33 that sent me; John 6:39 and this is the will of him that sent me, that I should lose nothing of 34 [Arabic, p. 76] that which he gave me, but raise it up in the last day. John 6:40 This is the will of my Father, that every one that sees the Son, and believes in him, should have eternal life; and I will raise him up in the last day.

35 John 6:41 The Jews therefore murmured against him because of his saying, I am the bread 36 which came down from heaven. John 6:42 And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? Then how says this *man*, I came down from 37, 38 heaven? John 6:43 Jesus answered and said unto them, Murmur not one with another. John 6:44 No man is able to come unto me, except the Father which sent me draw him; and I will 39 raise him up in the last day. John 6:45 It is written in the prophet, They shall all be the taught of God. Every one who hears from the Father now, and learns of him, comes 40 unto me. John 6:46 No man now sees the Father; but he that is from God, he it is that sees 41 the Father. John 6:47 Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever believes in me has eternal 42, 43 life. John 6:48 I am the bread of life. John 6:49 Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and 44 they died. John 6:50 This is the bread which came down from heaven, that a man may eat 45 of it, and not die. John 6:51 I am the bread of life which came down from heaven: and if a man eat of this bread he shall live for ever: and the bread which I shall give is my body, which I give for the life of the world.

46 John 6:52 The Jews therefore quarrelled one with another, and said, How can he give us 47 [Arabic, p. 77] his body that we may eat it? John 6:53 Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, If you do not eat the body of the Son of man and drink his blood, you shall 48 not have life in yourselves. John 6:54 Whosoever eats of my body and drinks of my blood 49 has eternal life; and I will raise him up in the last day. John 6:55 My body truly is meat, and 50 my blood truly is drink. John 6:56 Whosoever eats my body and drinks my blood abides 51 in me, and I in him— John 6:57 as the living Father sent me, and I am alive because of the 52 Father; and whosoever eats me, he also shall live because of me. John 6:58 This is the bread which came down from heaven: and not according as your fathers ate the 53 manna, and died: whosoever eats of this bread shall live for ever. John 6:59 This he said in 54 the synagogue, when he was teaching in Capernaum. John 6:60 And many of his disciples, when they heard, said, This word is hard; who is he that can hear it?
