# Section 13

1 Matthew 10:16 I am sending you as lambs among wolves: be ye now wise as serpents, and 2 harmless as doves. Matthew 10:17 Beware of men: they shall deliver you to the councils of the 3 magistrates, and scourge you in their synagogues; Matthew 10:18 and shall bring you before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and against the nations. 4 Matthew 10:19 And when they deliver you up, be not anxious, nor consider beforehand, what ye 5 shall say; but you shall be given in that hour what ye ought to speak. Matthew 10:20 You do not 6 speak, but the Spirit of your Father speaks in you. Matthew 10:21 The brother shall deliver up his brother to death, and the father his son; and the sons shall rise against their 7 parents, and put them to death. Matthew 10:22 And you shall be hated of every man because of 8 my name; but he that endures unto the end of the matter shall be saved. Matthew 10:23 When they expel you from this city, flee to another. Verily I say unto you, You shall not finish all the cities of the people of Israel, until the Son of man come.

9, 10 Matthew 10:24 A disciple is not superior to his lord, nor a servant to his master. Matthew 10:25 For it is enough then for the disciple that he be as his lord, and the servant as his master. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more the people 11 of his house! Matthew 10:26 Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall 12 [Arabic, p. 51] not be revealed; nor hid, that shall not be disclosed and published. What I say unto you in the darkness, speak ye in the light; and what you have told 13 secretly in the ears in closets, let it be proclaimed on the housetops. I say unto you now, my beloved, Be not agitated at those who kill the body, but have no power to 14 kill the soul. I will inform you whom you shall fear: him which is able to destroy 15 soul and body in hell. Yea, I say unto you, Be afraid of him especially. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing in a bond? and one of them shall not fall on the 16 ground without your Father. Matthew 10:30 But what concerns you: even the hair of your heads 17, 18 also is numbered. Matthew 10:31 Fear not therefore; you are better than many sparrows. Matthew 10:32 Every man who confesses me now before men, I also will confess him before my Father 19 which is in heaven; Matthew 10:33 but whosoever denies me before men, I also will deny him before my Father which is in heaven.

20 Luke 12:51 Think ye that I have come to cast peace into the earth? I came not to cast peace, 21 but to cast dissension. Luke 12:52 Henceforth there shall be five in one house, three of them 22 disagreeing with two, and the two with the three. Luke 12:53 The father shall become hostile to his son, and the son to his father; and the mother to her daughter, and the daughter to her mother; and the mother in law to her daughter in law, and the daughter 23 in law to her mother in law: Matthew 10:36 and a man's enemies shall be the people of his house. 24 Matthew 10:37 Whosoever loves father or mother better than me is not worthy of me; and whosoever [Arabic, p. 52] loves son or daughter more than his love of me is not worthy of me. 25 Matthew 10:38 And every one that does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of 26 me. Matthew 10:39 Whosoever finds his life shall lose it; and whosoever loses his life for my sake shall find it.

27 Matthew 10:40 And whosoever receives you receives me; and whosoever receives me receives 28 him that sent me. Matthew 10:41 And whosoever receives a prophet in the name of a prophet shall take a prophet's reward; and whosoever shall receive a righteous man 29 in the name of a righteous man shall take a righteous man's reward. And every one that shall give to drink to one of these least ones a drink of water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward.

30 Matthew 11:1 And when Jesus finished charging his twelve disciples, he removed thence to 31 teach and preach in their cities. Luke 10:38 And while they were going in the way they entered into a certain village; and a woman named Martha entertained him in her house. 32 Luke 10:39 And she had a sister named Mary, and she came and sat at the feet of our Lord, 33 and heard his sayings. Luke 10:40 But Martha was disquieted by much serving; and she came and said unto him, My Lord, do you give no heed that my sister left me alone to 34 serve? Speak to her that she help me. Luke 10:41 Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, 35 Martha, you are solicitous and impatient on account of many things: Luke 10:42 but what is sought is one *thing*. But Mary has chosen for herself a good portion, and that which shall not be taken from her.

36 Mark 6:12 And the apostles went forth, and preached to the people that they might repent. 37 Mark 6:13 And they cast out many devils, and anointed many sick with oil, and healed them. 38, 39 Luke 7:18 And the disciples of John told him of all these things. And when John heard in [Arabic, p. 53] the prison of the doings of the Messiah, he called two of his disciples, and sent them to Jesus, and said, Are you he that comes, or look we for 40 another? Luke 7:20 And they came to Jesus, and said unto him, John the Baptist has sent 41 us unto you, and said, Are you he that comes, or look we for another? Luke 7:21 And in that hour he cured many of diseases, and of plagues of an evil spirit; and he gave sight 42 to many blind. Luke 7:22 Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and tell John everything you have seen and heard: the blind see, and the lame walk, and the lepers are cleansed, and the blind hear, and the dead rise, and the poor have the gospel preached to 43 them. Luke 7:23 And blessed is he who doubts not in me.

44 Luke 7:24 And when John's disciples departed, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the 45 winds? Luke 7:25 And if not, then what went ye out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that are in magnificent garments and in voluptuousness are in the abode 46 of kings. Luke 7:26 And if not, then what went ye out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto 47 you, and more than a prophet. Luke 7:27 This is he of whom it is written,

> I am sending my messenger before your face
> To prepare the way before you.
