# Section 14

1 Matthew 11:11 Verily I say unto you, There has not arisen among those whom women have borne a greater than John the Baptist; but he that is little now in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

2 [Arabic, p. 54] Luke 7:29 And all the people which heard, and the publicans, justified God, for 3 they had been baptized with the baptism of John. Luke 7:30 But the Pharisees and the scribes wronged the purpose of God in themselves, in that they were not baptized of 4 him. Matthew 11:12a And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven is 5 snatched away by violence. Luke 16:16 The law and the prophets *were* until John; and after that, the kingdom of God is preached, and all press to enter it: Matthew 11:12b and they that exert themselves 6, 7 snatch it away. Matthew 11:13 All the prophets and the law until John prophesied. Matthew 11:14 And if you 8 will, then receive *it*, that he is Elijah, which is to come. Matthew 11:15 Whosoever has ears that hear 9 let him hear. Luke 16:17 Easier is the perishing of heaven and earth, than the passing away of 10 one point of the law. Luke 7:31b To whom then shall I liken the people of this generation, and 11 to whom are they like? Luke 7:32 They are like the children sitting in the market, which call to their companions, and say, We sang to you, and you danced not; we wailed to you, 12 and you wept not. Luke 7:33 John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine; 13 and you said, He has demons: Luke 7:34 and the Son of man came eating and drinking; and you said, Behold, a gluttonous man, and a drinker of wine, and an associate of publicans 14, 15 and sinners! Luke 7:35 And wisdom was justified of all her children. And when he said that, they came to the house. And there gathered unto him again multitudes, 16 so that they found not bread to eat. Luke 11:14 And while he was casting out a devil which was dumb, when he cast out that devil, that dumb *man* spoke. And the multitudes 17 [Arabic, p. 55] marvelled. Matthew 12:24 And the Pharisees, when they heard, said, This *man* does not cast out the devils, except by Beelzebul the chief of the demons, which is in him. 18, 19 Luke 11:16 And others requested of him a sign from heaven, to tempt him. Matthew 12:25 And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them in parables, Every kingdom that withstands itself shall become desolate; and every house or city that disagrees with itself shall not 20 stand: Matthew 12:26a and if a devil cast out a devil, he withstands himself; neither shall he be 21 able to stand, but his end shall be. Then how now shall his kingdom stand? For you 22 said that I cast out devils by Beelzebul. And if I by Beelzebul cast out the devils, then your children, by what do they cast them out? And for this cause they shall 23 be judges against you. Matthew 12:28 But if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils, then the kingdom 24 of God has come near unto you. Matthew 12:29 Or how can a man enter into the house of a valiant *man*, and seize his garments, if he do not beforehand secure himself from 25 that valiant *man?* and then will he cut off his house. Luke 11:21 But when the valiant man is 26 armed, guarding his house, his possessions are in peace. Luke 11:22 But if one come who is more valiant than he, he overcomes him, and takes his whole armour, on which 27 he relies, and divides his spoil. Luke 11:23 Whosoever is not with me is against me; and 28 whosoever gathers not with me scatters abroad. Mark 3:28 For this reason I say unto you, [Arabic, p. 56] that all sins and blasphemies with which men blaspheme shall be forgiven 29 them: but whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit, there is no 30 forgiveness for him for ever, but he is deserving of eternal punishment: Mark 3:30 because they 31 said that he had an unclean spirit. Matthew 12:32 And he said also, Every one that speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to 32 come. Matthew 12:33 Either ye must make a good tree and its fruit good; or ye must make an evil 33 tree and its fruit evil: for the tree is known by its fruit. Matthew 12:34 You children of vipers, how can you, being evil, speak good things? From the overflowings of the heart the mouth 34 speaks. Luke 6:45a The good man from the good treasures which are in his heart brings forth good things; and the wicked man from the evil treasures which are in his 35 heart brings forth evils. Matthew 12:36 I say unto you, that every idle word which men shall 36 speak, they shall give an answer for in the day of judgement: Matthew 12:37 for by your sayings you shall be justified, and by your sayings you shall be judged.

37 Luke 12:54 And he said to the multitudes, When ye see the clouds appear from the west, 38 straightway ye say that there comes rain; and so it comes to pass. Luke 12:55 And when 39 the south wind blows, you say that there will be heat; and it comes to pass. Matthew 16:2b And when the evening has come, you say, It *will be* fair weather, for the heaven has become 40 red. Matthew 16:3 And in the morning ye say, Today there will be severe weather, for the redness [Arabic, p. 57] of the heaven is paling. *You* hypocrites, you know to examine the face of the heaven and the earth; but the signs of this time ye know not to discern.

41 Matthew 12:22 Then they brought to him one possessed of a demon, dumb *and* blind; and he 42 healed him, so that the dumb and blind began to speak and see. Matthew 12:23 And all the multitudes wondered, and said, Is this, think you, the son of David?

43 Mark 6:30 And the apostles returned unto Jesus, and told him everything that they had 44 done and wrought. Mark 6:31 And he said unto them, Come, let us go into the desert alone, and rest ye a little. And many were going and returning, and they had not leisure, not even to eat bread.

45 Luke 7:36 And after that, there came to *him* one of the Pharisees, and besought him that he would eat bread with him. And he entered into the house of that Pharisee, and 46 reclined. Luke 7:37 And there was in that city a woman *that was* a sinner; and when she knew that he was sitting in the house of that Pharisee, she took a box of sweet ointment, 47 and stood behind him, Luke 7:38 towards his feet, weeping, and began to wet his feet with her tears, and to wipe them with the hair of her head, and to kiss his feet, and 48 anoint them with the sweet ointment. Luke 7:39 And when that Pharisee saw *it*, who invited him, he thought within himself, and said, This *man*, if he were a prophet, would know who she is and what is her history: for the woman which touched him was a sinner.
