# Section 11

1 [Arabic, p. 42] Matthew 7:28 And when Jesus finished these sayings, the multitudes were astonished 2 at his teaching; Matthew 7:29 and that because he was teaching them as one having authority, not as their scribes and the Pharisees.

3 Matthew 8:1 And when he descended from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.

4 And when Jesus entered Capernaum, the servant of one of the chiefs was in an 5 evil case, and he was precious to him, and he was at the point of death. Luke 7:3 And he 6 heard of Jesus, and came to him with the elders of the Jews; and he besought him, and said, My Lord, my boy is laid in the house paralysed, and he is suffering grievous 7 torment. Luke 7:4b And the elders urgently requested of him, and said, He is worthy that 8 this should be done unto him: Luke 7:5 for he loves our people, and he also built the synagogue 9, 10 for us. Matthew 8:7 Jesus said unto him, I will come and heal him. Matthew 8:8 That chief answered and said, My Lord, I am not worthy that my roof should shade you; but it suffices 11 that you speak a word, and my lad shall be healed. Luke 7:8 And I also am a man in obedience to authority, having under my hand soldiers: and I say to this *one*, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant that he do this, 12 and he does *it*. Luke 7:9a And when Jesus heard that, he marvelled at him, and turned and said unto the multitude that were coming with him, Matthew 8:10b Verily I say unto you, I have 13 not found in Israel *the* like *of* this faith. Matthew 8:11 I say unto you, that many shall come from the east and the west, and shall recline with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob 14 [Arabic, p. 43] in the kingdom of heaven: Matthew 8:12 but the children of the kingdom shall be cast 15 forth into the outer darkness: and there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matthew 8:13 And Jesus said to that chief, Go your way; as you have believed, *so* shall it be unto you. 16 Luke 7:10 And his lad was healed in that hour. And that chief returned to the house and found that sick servant healed.

17 Luke 7:11 And the day after, he was going to a city called Nain, and his disciples with him, 18 and a great multitude. Luke 7:12 And when he had come near the gate of the city, he saw a crowd accompanying one *that was* dead, the only son of his mother; and his mother was a widow: and there was with her a great multitude of the people of the 19 city. Luke 7:13 And when Jesus saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep 20 not. Luke 7:14 And he went and advanced to the bier, and the bearers of it stood still; and 21 he said, Young man, I say unto you, Arise. Luke 7:15 And that dead *man* sat up and began 22 to speak; and he gave him to his mother. Luke 7:16 And fear came on all the people: and they praised God, and said, There has risen among us a great prophet: and, God 23 has had regard to his people. Luke 7:17 And this news concerning him spread in all Judæa, and in all the region which was about them.

24 Matthew 8:18 And when Jesus saw great multitudes surrounding him, he commanded them to 25 depart to the other side. And while they were going in the way, there came one of the scribes and said unto him, My Master, I will follow you wherever you 26 go. Matthew 8:20 Jesus said unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the heaven have 27 nests; but the Son of man has not a place in which to lay his head. Luke 9:59 And he said unto another, Follow me. And he said unto him, My Lord, suffer me first to go and 28 bury my father. Luke 9:60 Jesus said unto him, Leave the dead to bury their dead; but you, 29 follow me and preach the kingdom of God. Luke 9:61 And another said unto him, I will follow [Arabic, p. 44] you, my Lord; but first suffer me to go and salute my household and 30 come. Luke 9:62 Jesus said unto him, There is no one who puts his hand to the plough and looks behind him, and *yet* is fit for the kingdom of God.

31 And he said to them on that day in the evening, Let us go over to the other side 32 of the lake; and he left the multitudes. And Jesus went up and sat in the ship, 33 he and his disciples, and there were with them other ships. And there occurred on the sea a great tempest of whirlwind and wind, Luke 8:23c and the ship was on the point of 34 sinking from the greatness of the waves. Mark 4:38a But Jesus was sleeping on a cushion in the stern of the ship; Matthew 8:25 and his disciples came and awoke him, and said unto him, Our 35 Lord, save us; lo, we perish. Luke 8:24b And he rose, and rebuked the winds and the turbulence of the water, and said to the sea, Be still, for you are rebuked; Mark 4:39b and the wind 36 was still, and there was a great calm. Mark 4:40 And he said unto them, Why are you thus 37 afraid? And why have ye no faith? Luke 8:25b And they feared greatly. And they marvelled, and said one to another, Who, think you, is this, who commands also the wind and the waves and the sea, and they obey him?

38 Luke 8:26 And they departed and came to the country of the Gadarenes, which is on the 39 other side, opposite the land of Galilee. Luke 8:27a And when he went out of the ship to the land, there met him from among the tombs a man who had a devil for a long time, 40 and wore no clothes, neither dwelt in a house, but among the tombs. Mark 5:3b And no man was [Arabic, p. 45] able to bind him with chains, Mark 5:4a because any time that he was bound with chains 41 and fetters he cut the chains and loosened the fetters; Luke 8:29c and he was snatched 42 away of the devil into the desert, and no man was able to quiet him; and at all times, in the night and in the day, he would be among the tombs and in the mountains; Matthew 8:28b and no man was able to pass by that way; Mark 5:5b and he would cry out and wound himself 43 with stones. Mark 5:6 And when he saw Jesus at a distance, he hastened and worshipped 44 him, and cried with a loud voice and said, What have we to do with you, Jesus, 45 Son of the most high God? I adjure you by God, torment me not. And Jesus commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man: and he had *suffered* a long 46 time since the time when he came into captivity to it. Luke 8:30 And Jesus asked him, What is your name? He said unto him, Legion; for there had entered into him many 47 devils. Luke 8:31 And they besought him that he would not command them to depart into 48 the depths. Luke 8:32 And there was there a herd of many swine, feeding in the mountain, and those devils besought him to give them leave to enter the swine; and he gave 49 them leave. Luke 8:33 And the devils went out of the man and entered into the swine. Mark 5:13b And that herd hastened to the summit and fell down into the midst of the sea, about two 50 thousand, and they were choked in the water. Luke 8:34 And when the keepers saw what 51 happened, they fled, and told those in the cities and villages. Luke 8:35 And the people went out to see what had happened; and they came to Jesus, and found the man whose [Arabic, p. 46] devils had gone out, clothed, modest, seated at the feet of Jesus; and they 52 feared. Luke 8:36 And they reported what they saw, and how the man was healed who had a devil, Mark 5:16b and concerning those swine also.
