# Section 22

1 Luke 5:12 And when Jesus came to a certain village, there drew near to him a leper, and fell at his feet, and besought him, and said unto him, If you will, you are able to 2 cleanse me. Mark 1:41 And Jesus had mercy upon him, and stretched forth his hand, and 3 touched him, and said, I will cleanse you. Mark 1:42 And immediately his leprosy departed 4 from him, and he was cleansed. Mark 1:43 And he sternly charged him, and sent him out, 5 [Arabic, p. 85] and said unto him, Mark 1:44 See that you tell *not* any man: but go and show yourself to the priests, and offer an offering for your cleansing as Moses commanded 6 for their testimony. Mark 1:45a But he, when he went out, began to publish much, and spread abroad the news, so that Jesus could not enter into any of the cities openly, for the extent to which the report of him spread, but he remained without in a desert 7 place. Luke 5:15 And much people came unto him from one place and another, to hear 8 his word, and that they might be healed of their pains. Luke 5:16 And he used to withdraw from them into the desert, and pray.

9 And after that, was the feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

10 John 5:2 And there was in Jerusalem a place prepared for bathing, which was called in 11 Hebrew the House of Mercy, having five porches. John 5:3 And there were laid in them much people of the sick, and blind, and lame, and paralysed, waiting for the moving 12 of the water. John 5:4 And the angel from time to time went down into the place of bathing, and moved the water; and the first that went down after the moving 13 of the water, every pain that he had was healed. John 5:5 And a man was there who had a 14 disease for thirty-eight years. John 5:6 And Jesus saw this *man* laid, and knew that he had 15 been thus a long time; and he said unto him, Would you be made whole? John 5:7 That diseased one answered and said, Yea, my Lord, I have no man, when the water moves, to put me into the bathing-place; but when I come, another goes down before 16, 17 me. John 5:8 Jesus said unto him, Rise, take your bed, and walk. John 5:9 And immediately that man was healed; and he rose, and carried his bed, and walked.

18 John 5:10 And that day was a sabbath. And when the Jews saw that healed one, they said 19 unto him, It is a sabbath: you have no authority to carry your bed. John 5:11 And he answered and said unto them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take your bed, 20 [Arabic, p. 86] and walk. John 5:12 They asked him therefore, Who is this man that said unto you, 21 Take your bed, and walk? John 5:13 But he that was healed knew not who it was; for Jesus had removed from that place to another, because of the press of the great multitude 22 which was in that place. John 5:14 And after two days Jesus happened upon him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, you are whole: sin not again, lest there come upon 23 you what is worse than the first. John 5:15 And that man went, and said to the Jews that it 24 was Jesus that had healed him. John 5:16 And because of that the Jews persecuted Jesus and 25 sought to kill him, because he was doing this on the sabbath. John 5:17 And Jesus said unto 26 them, My Father works until now, and I also work. John 5:18 And because of this especially the Jews sought to kill him, not because he profaned the sabbath only; but for his saying also that God was his Father, and his making himself equal with God. 27 John 5:19 Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son cannot do anything of himself, but what he sees the Father do; what the Father does, 28 that the Son also does like him. John 5:20 The Father loves his Son, and everything that he does he shows him: and more than these works will he show him, that you 29 may marvel. John 5:21 And as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so the Son 30 also gives life to whomsoever he will. John 5:22 And the Father judges no man, but has 31 given all judgement unto the Son; John 5:23 that every man may honour the Son, as he honours the Father. And he that honours not the Son honours not the Father which 32 sent him. John 5:24 Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has eternal life, and comes not into judgement, but passes from 33 [Arabic, p. 87] death unto life. John 5:25 Verily, verily, I say unto you, An hour shall come, and now is also, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and those 34 which hear shall live. John 5:26 And as the Father has life in himself, likewise he gave to 35 the Son also that he might have life in himself, John 5:27 and authority to do judgement also, 36 because he is the Son of man. John 5:28 Marvel not then at that: I mean the coming of the hour when all that are in the tombs shall hear his voice, and shall come forth: 37 John 5:29 those that have done good, to the resurrection of life; and those that have done evil *deeds*, to the resurrection of judgement.

38 John 5:30 I am not able of myself to do anything; but as I hear, I judge: and my judgement 39 is just; I seek not my *own* will, but the will of him that sent me. John 5:31 I bear witness 40 of myself, and so my witness is not true. John 5:32 It is another that bears witness 41 of me; and I know that the witness which he bears of me is true. John 5:33 You have sent 42 unto John, and he has borne witness of the truth. John 5:34 But not from man do I seek 43 witness; but I say that you may live. John 5:35 That was a lamp which shines and 44 gives light: and you were pleased to glory now in his light. John 5:36 But I have witness greater than that of John: the works which my Father has given me to accomplish, 45 those works which I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. John 5:37 And the Father which sent me, he has borne witness of me. You have neither heard his 46 voice at any time, nor seen his appearance. John 5:38 And his word abides not in you; because 47 in him whom he has sent ye do not believe. John 5:39 Search the scriptures, in which you rejoice 48 that you have eternal life; John 5:40 and they bear witness of me; and you do not wish to come to 49, 50 [Arabic, p. 88] me, that you may have eternal life. John 5:41 I seek not praise of men. John 5:42 But I know 51 you, that the love of God is not in you. John 5:43 I have come in the name of my Father, and you received me not; but if another come in his own name, that *one* will 52 ye receive. John 5:44 And how can you believe, while you receive praise one from another, and 53 praise from God, the One, you seek not? John 5:45 Can it be that you think that I will accuse you before the Father? You have one that accuses you, Moses, in whom you have 54 rejoiced. John 5:46 If you believed Moses, you would believe me also; Moses wrote of me. 55 John 5:47 And if you believed not his writings, how shall you believe my words?
