# Section 25

1 Luke 9:46 And in that day this thought presented itself to his disciples, and they said, which 2 haply should be the great *est* among them. Mark 9:33 And when they came to Capernaum, and entered into the house, Jesus said unto them, What were ye considering in the 3 way among yourselves? Mark 9:34a And they were silent because they had considered that *matter*.

4 Matthew 17:24b And when Simon went forth without, those that received two dirhams for the tribute came to Cephas, and said unto him, Does your master not give his two 5 dirhams? He said unto them, Yea. Matthew 17:25 And when Cephas entered the house, Jesus anticipated him, and said unto him, What do you think, Simon? The kings of the earth, from whom do they receive custom and tribute? From their sons, or from 6 [Arabic, p. 97] strangers? Matthew 17:26 Simon said unto him, From strangers. Jesus said unto him, Children then are free. Simon said unto him, Yea. Jesus said unto him, 7 Give also unto them, like the stranger. Matthew 17:27 But, lest it trouble them, go to the sea, and cast *a* hook; and the first fish that comes up, open its mouth, *and* you shall find a stater: take therefore that, and give for me and you.

8 Matthew 18:1 And in that hour came the disciples to Jesus, and said unto him, Who, do you think 9, is greater in the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus knew the thought of their heart, and called a child, and set him in the midst, and took him in his arms, and 10 said unto them, Matthew 18:3 Verily I say unto you, If you do not return, and become as children, 11 you shall not enter the kingdom of heaven. Luke 9:48 Every one that shall receive in my name such as this child has received me: Mark 9:37b and whosoever receives me receives 12 not me, but him that sent me. Luke 9:48c And he who is little in your company, the same 13 shall be great. Matthew 18:6 But whosoever shall injure one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him that a great millstone should be hanged about his neck, and *he should be* drowned in the depths of the sea.

14 Luke 9:49 John answered and said, Our Master, we saw one casting out devils in your name; 15 and we prevented him, because he followed not you with us. Mark 9:39 Jesus said unto them, Prevent him not; for no man does powers in my name, and can hasten to speak evil 16, 17 of me. Luke 9:50b Every one who is not in opposition to you is with you. Woe unto the world [Arabic, p. 98] because of trials! but woe unto that man by whose hand the trials come! 18 Matthew 18:8 If your hand or your foot injure you, cut it off, and cast it from you; for it is better for you to enter into life being halt or maimed, and not that you should have two hands or two feet, and fall into the hell of fire that burns for ever; 19, 20 Mark 9:44 where their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched. Matthew 18:9a And if your eye seduce 21 you, pluck it out, and cast it from you; Mark 9:47b for it is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye, than that you should have two eyes, and fall into the 22, 23 fire of Gehenna; Mark 9:48 where their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched. Mark 9:49 Every 24 *one* shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt. Mark 9:50a How good 25 is salt! But if the salt also be tasteless, wherewith shall it be salted? It is fit neither for the land nor for dung, but they cast it out. He that has ears to hear, let him 26 hear. Mark 9:50c Have ye salt in yourselves, and be in peace one with another.

27 Mark 10:1 And he arose from thence, and came to the borders of Judæa beyond Jordan: and there went unto him there great multitudes, and he healed them; and he taught 28 them also, according to his custom. Mark 10:2 And the Pharisees came unto him, tempting 29 him, and asking him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife? Mark 10:3 He said, What 30 did Moses command you? Mark 10:4 They said, Moses made it allowable for us, *saying*, Whosoever 31 will, let him write a writing of divorcement, and put away his wife. Mark 10:5a Jesus answered and said unto them, Matthew 19:4 Have ye not read, He that made *them* from the beginning 32 made them male and female, and said, Matthew 19:5 For this reason shall the man leave his father [Arabic, p. 99] and his mother, and cleave to his wife; and they both shall be one body? 33 Matthew 19:6 So then they are not two, but one body; the thing, then, which God has 34 joined together, let no man put asunder. Matthew 19:7 And those Pharisees said unto him, Why did Moses consent that a *man* should give a writing of divorcement and put her away? 35 Matthew 19:8 Jesus said unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts gave you leave 36 to divorce your wives; but in the beginning it was not so. Matthew 19:9a I say unto you, Whosoever puts away his wife without fornication, and marries another, has exposed 37 her to adultery. Mark 10:10 And his disciples, when he entered the house, asked him again 38 about that. Mark 10:11 And he said unto them, Every one who puts away his wife, and 39 marries another, has exposed her to adultery. Mark 10:12 And any woman that leaves her husband, and becomes another's, has committed adultery. Matthew 19:9b And whosoever marries 40 her that is divorced has committed adultery. Matthew 19:10 And his disciples said unto him, If there be between the man and the woman such a case as this, it is not good for 41 a man to marry. Matthew 19:11 He said unto them, Not every man can endure this saying, except 42 him to whom it is given. Matthew 19:12 There are eunuchs which from their mother's womb were born so; and there are eunuchs which through men became eunuchs; and there are eunuchs which made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. He that is able to be content, let him be content.

43 Matthew 19:13a Then they brought to him children, that he should lay his hand upon them, and 44 pray: and his disciples were rebuking those that were bringing them. And Jesus saw, and it was distressing to him; and he said unto them, Suffer the children to [Arabic, p. 100] come unto me, and prevent them not; for those that are like these have 45 the kingdom of God. Mark 10:15 Verily I say unto you, Whosoever receives not the 46 kingdom of God as this child, shall not enter it. Mark 10:16 And he took them in his arms, and laid his hand upon them, and blessed them.
