# Section 26

1, 2 Luke 15:1 And there came unto him publicans and sinners to hear his word. Luke 15:2 And the scribes and the Pharisees murmured, and said, This man receives sinners, and 3 eats with them. Luke 15:3 And Jesus, when he beheld their murmuring, spoke unto them 4 this parable: Luke 15:4 What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if one of them were lost, would not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go and seek the straying *one* 5 till he found it? Matthew 18:13 Verily I say unto you, When he finds it, he will rejoice over it 6 more than *over* the ninety-nine that went not astray; Luke 15:5b and bear it on his shoulders, and bring it to his house, and call his friends and neighbours, Luke 15:6 and say unto them, 7 Rejoice with me, since I have found my straying sheep. Matthew 18:14 So your Father which is in heaven wills not that one of these little ones that have strayed should perish, 8 and he seeks for them repentance. Luke 15:7 I say unto you, Thus there shall be rejoicing in heaven over one sinner that repents, more than *over* ninety-nine righteous persons that do not need repentance.

9 Luke 15:8 And what woman having ten drachmas would lose one of them, and not light a 10 lamp, and sweep the house, and seek it with care till she found it; Luke 15:9 and when she found it, call her friends and neighbours, and say unto them, Rejoice with me, as I 11 have found my drachma that was lost? Luke 15:10 I say unto you, Thus there shall be joy [Arabic, p. 101] before the angels of God over the one sinner that repents, more than over the ninety-nine righteous *persons* that do not need repentance.

12, 13 Luke 15:11 And Jesus spoke unto them also another parable: Luke 15:12 A man had two sons: and the younger son said unto him, My father, give me my portion that belongs to 14 me of your goods. Luke 15:13 And he divided between them his property. And after a few days the younger son gathered everything that belonged to him, and went into a 15 far country, and there squandered his property by living prodigally. Luke 15:14 And when he had exhausted everything he had, there occurred a great dearth in that country. 16 Luke 15:15 And when he was in want, he went and joined himself to one of the people of a city 17 of that country; and that *man* sent him into the field to feed the swine. Luke 15:16 And he used to long to fill his belly with the carob that those swine were eating: and no man 18 gave him. Luke 15:17 And when he returned unto himself, he said, How many hired servants now in my father's house have bread enough and to spare, while I here perish with 19 hunger! Luke 15:18 I will arise and go to my father's house, and say unto him, My father, Luke 15:19 I 20 have sinned in heaven and before you, and am not worthy now to be called your 21 son: make me as one of your hired servants. Luke 15:20 And he arose, and came to his father. But his father saw him while he was at a distance, and was moved with compassion 22 for him, and ran, and fell on his breast, and kissed him. Luke 15:21 And his son said unto him, My father, I have sinned in heaven and before you, and am not worthy to be 23 called your son. Luke 15:22 His father said unto his servants, Bring forth a stately robe, and put 24 *it* on him; and put a ring on his hand, and put on him shoes on his feet: and bring and 25 slay a fatted ox, that we may eat and make merry: Luke 15:24 for this my son was dead, and is 26 [Arabic, p. 102] alive; and was lost, and is found. Luke 15:25 And they began to be merry. Now his elder son was in the field; and when he came and drew near to the house, 27 he heard the sound of many singing. Luke 15:26 And he called one of the lads, and asked him 28 what this was. Luke 15:27 He said unto him, Your brother has arrived; and your father has 29 slain a fatted ox, since he has received him safe and sound. Luke 15:28 And he was angry, 30 and would not enter; so his father went out, and besought him to enter. Luke 15:29 And he said to his father, How many years do I serve you in bondage, and I never transgressed a commandment of yours; and you have never given me a kid, that I might 31 make merry with my friends? Luke 15:30 but this your son, when he had squandered your 32 property with harlots, and come, you have slain for him a fatted ox. Luke 15:31 His father said unto him, My son, you are at all times with me, and everything I have is 33 yours. Luke 15:32 It behooves you to rejoice and make merry, since this your brother was dead, and is alive; and *was* lost, and is found.

34 Luke 16:1 And he spoke a parable unto his disciples: There was a rich man, and he had 35 a steward; and he was accused to him that he had squandered his property. Luke 16:2 So his lord called him, and said unto him, What is this that I hear regarding you? Give me the account of your stewardship; for it is now impossible that you should 36 be a steward for me. Luke 16:3 The steward said within himself, What shall I do, seeing that my lord takes from me the stewardship? To dig I am not able; and to beg I 37 am ashamed. Luke 16:4 I know what I will do, that, when I go out of the stewardship, they 38 may receive me into their houses. Luke 16:5 And he called one after another of his lord's 39 debtors, and said to the first, How much do you owe my lord? Luke 16:6 He said unto him, An hundred portions of oil. He said unto him, Take your writing, and sit down, and write 40 quickly fifty portions. Luke 16:7 And he said to the next, And you, how much do you owe my lord? He said unto him, An hundred cors of wheat. He said unto him, Take 41 [Arabic, p. 103] your writing, and sit down, and write eighty cors. Luke 16:8 And our lord commended the sinful steward because he had done a wise deed; for the children 42 of this world are wiser than the children of the light in this their age. Luke 16:9 And I also say unto you, Make unto yourselves friends with the wealth of this unrighteousness; 43 so that, when it is exhausted, they may receive you into their tents for ever. Luke 16:10 He who is faithful in a little is faithful also in much: and he who is unrighteous in a 44 little is unrighteous also in much. Luke 16:11 If then in the wealth of unrighteousness you were 45 not trustworthy, who will entrust you with the truth? Luke 16:12 If you are not found faithful in what does not belong to you, who will give you what belongs to you?
