# Section 20

1 John 6:61 And Jesus knew within himself that his disciples were murmuring because of 2 that, and he said unto them, Does this trouble you? John 6:62 *What* if you should see the Son 3 of man then ascend to the place where he was of old? John 6:63 It is the spirit that quickens, and the body profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you are spirit 4 and life. John 6:64 But there are some of you that do not believe. And Jesus knew beforehand who they were who should not believe, and who it was that should betray 5 him. John 6:65 And he said unto them, Therefore I said unto you, No man can come unto me, if that has not been given him by the Father.

6 [Arabic, p. 78] John 6:66 And because of this word many of his disciples turned back and walked 7 not with him. John 6:67 And Jesus said unto the twelve, Do ye haply also wish to 8 go away? John 6:68 Simon Cephas answered and said, My Lord, to whom shall we go? You 9 have the words of eternal life. John 6:69 And we have believed and known that you are the 10 Messiah, the Son of the living God. John 6:70 Jesus said unto them, Did not I choose you, 11 ye company of the twelve, and of you one is a devil? John 6:71 He said that because of Judas the son of Simon Iscariot; for he, being of the twelve, was purposed to betray him.

12 Luke 11:37 And while he was speaking, one of the Pharisees came asking of him that he 13 would eat with him: and he went in, and reclined *to meat*. Luke 11:38 And that Pharisee, when 14 he saw it, marvelled that he had not first cleansed himself before his eating. Luke 11:39 Jesus said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees wash the outside of the cup and the dish, and you think that you are cleansed; but your inside is full of injustice and wickedness.

15, 16 Luke 11:40 You of little mind, did not he that made the outside make the inside? Luke 11:41 Now give what you have in alms, and everything *shall be* clean unto you.

17, 18 Mark 7:1 And there came to him Pharisees and scribes, come from Jerusalem. Mark 7:2 And when they saw some of his disciples eating bread while they had not washed their hands, 19 they found fault. Mark 7:3 For all of the Jews and the Pharisees, if they wash not their 20 hands thoroughly, eat not; for they held to the ordinance of the elders. Mark 7:4 And they ate not what was bought from the market, except they washed it; and many other things did they keep of what they had received, such as the washing of cups, and 21 measures, and vessels of brass, and couches. Mark 7:5 And scribes and Pharisees asked him, [Arabic, p. 79] Why do your disciples not walk according to the ordinances of the elders, but 22 eat bread without washing their hands? Matthew 15:3 Jesus answered and said unto them, Why do ye also overstep the command of God by reason of your ordinance? 23 God said, Honour your father and your mother; and, Whosoever reviles his father and 24 his mother shall surely die. Mark 7:11 But ye say, If a man say to his father or to his mother, 25 What you receive from me is an offering,— Mark 7:12 and you suffer him not to do anything 26 for his father or his mother; Mark 7:13 and you make void and reject the word of God by reason of the ordinance that you have ordained and commanded, such as the washing 27 of cups and measures, and what resembles that you do much. Mark 7:8 And ye forsook 28 the command of God, and held to the ordinance of men. Mark 7:9 Do ye well to wrong 29 the command of God in order that you may establish your ordinance? Matthew 15:7 You hypocrites, well did Isaiah the prophet prophesy concerning you, and say,

> 30 Matthew 15:8 This people honours me with its lips;
> But their heart is very far from me.
> 31 Matthew 15:9 But in vain do they fear me,
> In that they teach the commands of men.

32 Mark 7:14 And Jesus called all the multitude, and said unto them, Hear me, all of you, and 33 understand: Mark 7:15 nothing without the man, which then enters him, is able to defile him; 34 but what goes out of him, that it is which defiles the man. Mark 7:16 He that has ears 35 that hear, let him hear. Matthew 15:12 Then his disciples drew near, and said unto him, Do you know 36 that the Pharisees which heard this word were angry? Matthew 15:13 He answered and said unto them, Every plant which my Father which is in heaven planted not shall be 37 [Arabic, p. 80] uprooted. Matthew 15:14 Let them alone; for they are blind leading blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both of them shall fall into a hollow.

38 And when Jesus entered the house from the multitude, Simon Cephas asked him, 39 and said unto him, My Lord, explain to us that parable. Mark 7:18b He said unto them, Do ye also thus not understand? Do you not know that everything that enters into the 40 man from without cannot defile him; Mark 7:19 because it enters not into his heart; it enters into his stomach only, and thence is cast forth in the cleansing which makes 41 clean all the food? Matthew 15:18 The thing which goes forth from the mouth of the man proceeds 42 from his heart, and it is that which defiles the man. Mark 7:21 From within the 43 heart of men proceed evil thoughts, Mark 7:22 fornication, adultery, theft, false witness, murder, injustice, wickedness, deceit, stupidity, evil eye, calumny, pride, foolishness: 44 Mark 7:23 these evils all of them from within proceed from the heart, and they are *the things* 45 which defile the man: Matthew 15:20b but if a man eat while he washes not his hands, he is not defiled.

46 And Jesus went out thence, and came to the borders of Tyre and Sidon. And he entered into a certain house, and desired that no man should know it; and 47 he could not be hid. Mark 7:25a But straightway a Canaanitish woman, whose daughter had an 48, 49 unclean spirit, heard of him. Mark 7:26a And that woman was a Gentile of Emesa of Syria. Matthew 15:22b And she came out after him, crying out, and saying, Have mercy upon me, my Lord, *you* 50 son of David; for my daughter is seized in an evil way by Satan. Matthew 15:23 And he answered [Arabic, p. 81] her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, and said, Send 51 her away: for she cries after us. Matthew 15:24 He answered and said unto them, I was 52 not sent except to the sheep that are gone astray of the house of Israel. Matthew 15:25 But she came and worshipped him, and said, My Lord, help me, have mercy upon me.

53 Matthew 15:26 Jesus said unto her, It is not seemly that the children's bread should be taken and 54 thrown to the dogs. Matthew 15:27 But she said, Yea, my Lord: the dogs also eat of the crumbs 55 that fall from their masters' tables, and live. Matthew 15:28a Then said Jesus unto her, O woman, 56 great is your faith: it shall be unto you as you have desired. Mark 7:29b Go then *your way;* and 57 because of this word, the devil is gone out of your daughter. Matthew 15:28b And her daughter was 58 healed in that hour. Mark 7:30 And that woman went away to her house, and found her daughter laid upon the bed, and the devil gone out of her.
