# Section 24

1 Mark 9:1 And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, There be here now some standing that shall not taste death, until they see the kingdom of God come with strength, Matthew 16:28b and the Son of man who comes in his kingdom.

2 Matthew 17:1 And after six days Jesus took Simon Cephas, and James, and John his brother, 3 and brought them up into a high mountain, the three of them only. Luke 9:29a And while they 4 were praying, Jesus changed, and became after the fashion of another person; and his face shone like the sun, and his raiment was very white like the snow, and as 5 the light of lightning, so that nothing on earth can whiten like it. And there appeared 6 unto him Moses and Elijah talking to Jesus. Luke 9:31b And they thought that the time 7 of his decease which was to be accomplished at Jerusalem had come. Luke 9:32 And Simon and those that were with him were heavy in the drowsiness of sleep; and with effort they roused themselves, and saw his glory, and those two men that were standing with him. 8 [Arabic, p. 93] Luke 9:33a And when they began to depart from him, Simon said unto Jesus, My 9 Master, it is good for us to be here: Matthew 17:4b and if you will, we will make here three tabernacles; one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah; Luke 9:33c not knowing 10 what he said, because of the fear which took possession of them. And while he 11 was yet saying that, a bright cloud overshadowed them. Luke 9:34b And when they saw Moses 12 and Elijah that they had entered into that cloud, they feared again. Matthew 17:5b And a voice was heard out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, whom I have chosen; 13 hear ye therefore him. Luke 9:36a And when this voice was heard, Jesus was found alone. 14 Matthew 17:6 And the disciples, when they heard the voice, fell on their faces from the fear which 15 took hold of them. Matthew 17:7 And Jesus came and touched them and said, Arise, be not 16 afraid. Matthew 17:8 And they lifted up their eyes, and saw Jesus as he was.

17 Matthew 17:9 And when they went down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, and said unto them, Tell not what you have seen to any man, until the Son of man rise from 18 among the dead. And they kept the word within themselves, and told no man in 19 those days what they had seen. Mark 9:10b And they reflected among themselves, What is this 20 word which he spoke unto us, I, when I am risen from among the dead? And his disciples asked him, and said, What is that which the scribes say, then, that Elijah 21 must first come? Mark 9:12 He said unto them, Elijah comes first to set in order everything, [Arabic, p. 94] and as it was written of the Son of man, that he should suffer many things, 22 and be rejected. Mark 9:13 But I say unto you, that Elijah has come, and they knew him not, and have done unto him whatsoever they desired, as it was written of him. 23, 24 Matthew 17:12b In like manner the Son of man is to suffer of them. Matthew 17:13 Then understood the disciples that he spoke unto them concerning John the Baptist.

25 Mark 9:14 And on that day whereon they came down from the mountain, there met him a multitude of many people standing with his disciples, and the scribes were discussing 26 with them. Mark 9:15 And the people, when they saw Jesus, were perplexed, and in the 27 midst of their joy hastened and saluted him. Luke 13:31 And on that day came certain of the Pharisees, and said unto him, Get you out, and go hence; for Herod seeks 28 to kill you. Luke 13:32 Jesus said unto them, Go ye and say to this fox, Behold, I am casting out demons, and I heal today and tomorrow, and on the third day I am perfected. 29 Luke 13:33 Nevertheless I must be watchful today and tomorrow, and on the last day I shall depart; for it cannot be that a prophet perish outside of Jerusalem.

30 And after that, there came to him a man from that multitude, and fell upon his knees, and said unto him, I beseech you, my Lord, look upon my son; Luke 9:38b he is my 31 only *child*: and the spirit comes upon him suddenly. A lunacy has come upon 32 him, and he meets with evils. Mark 9:18a And when it comes upon him, it beats him about; 33 and he foams, and gnashes his teeth, and wasts; and many times it has thrown him into the water and into the fire to destroy him, and it hardly leaves him after 34 [Arabic, p. 95] bruising him. Matthew 17:16 And I brought him near to your disciples, and they could 35 not heal him. Matthew 17:17 Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, till when shall I be with you? And till when shall I bear with you? Bring your son 36 hither. Mark 9:20 And he brought him unto him: and when the spirit saw him, immediately 37 it beat him about; and he fell upon the ground, and was raging and foaming. Mark 9:21 And Jesus asked his father, How long is the time during which he has been thus? He 38 said unto him, From his youth until now. Mark 9:22b But, my Lord, help me wherein you 39 can, and have mercy upon me. Mark 9:23 Jesus said unto him, If you can believe! All 40 things are possible to him that believes. Mark 9:24 And immediately the father of the child 41 cried out, weeping, and said, I believe, my Lord; help my lack of faith. Mark 9:25 And when Jesus saw the hastening of the people, and their coming at the sound, he rebuked that unclean spirit, and said to it, You dumb spirit that speaks not, I command 42 you, come out of him, and enter not again into him. Mark 9:26 And that spirit, devil, cried out much, and bruised him, and came out; and that child fell as one dead, and 43 many thought that he had died. But Jesus took him by his hand, and raised him 44 up, and gave him to his father; and that child was healed from that hour. And the people all marvelled at the greatness of God.

45 Mark 9:28 And when Jesus entered into the house, his disciples came, and asked him 46 privately, and said unto him, Why were we not able to heal him? Matthew 17:20 Jesus said unto [Arabic, p. 96] them, Because of your unbelief. Verily I say unto you, If you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you shall say to this mountain, Remove hence; 47 and it shall remove; and nothing shall overcome you. Mark 9:29b But it is impossible to cast out this kind by anything except by fasting and prayer.

48 Mark 9:30 And when he went forth thence, they passed through Galilee: and he would not 49 that any man should know it. And he taught his disciples, and said unto them, 50 Mark 9:31b Keep ye these sayings in your ears and your hearts: for the Son of man is to be delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and when he is killed, he 51 shall rise on the third day. Luke 9:45 But they knew not the word which he spoke unto them, for it was concealed from them, that they should not perceive it; and they feared to 52 ask him about this word. Matthew 17:23b And they were exceeding sorrowful.
