# Section 21

1 Mark 7:31 And Jesus went out again from the border *s* of Tyre and Sidon, and came to the 2 sea of Galilee, towards the borders of Decapolis. Mark 7:32 And they brought unto him one dumb and deaf, and entreated him that he would lay his hand upon him and heal 3 him. Mark 7:33 And he drew him away from the multitude, and went away alone, and spat 4 upon his fingers, and thrust *them* into his ears, and touched his tongue; Mark 7:34 and looked 5 to heaven, and sighed, and said unto him, Be opened. Mark 7:35 And in that hour his ears 6 were opened, and the bond of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke with ease. Mark 7:36 And Jesus charged them much that they should not tell this to any man: but the more 7 he charged them, *the more* they increased in publishing, and marvelled much, Mark 7:37 and [Arabic, p. 82] said, This *man* does everything well: he made the deaf to hear, and those that lacked speech to speak.

8, 9 John 4:4 And while he was passing through the land of Samaria, John 4:5 he came to one of the cities of the Samaritans, called Sychar, beside the field which Jacob gave to Joseph to 10 his son. John 4:6 And there was there a spring of water of Jacob's. And Jesus was fatigued from the exertion of the way, and sat at the spring. And the time was about the 11 sixth hour. John 4:7And a woman of Samaria came to draw water; and Jesus said unto 12 her, Give me water, that I may drink. John 4:8 And his disciples had entered into the city 13 to buy for themselves food. John 4:9 And that Samaritan woman said unto him, How do you, being a Jew, ask me to give you to drink, while I am a Samaritan woman? 14 John 4:10 (And the Jews mingle not with the Samaritans. ) Jesus answered and said unto her, If you knew the gift of God, and who this is that said unto you, Give me 15 to drink; you would ask him, and he would give you the water of life. John 4:11 That woman said unto him, My Lord, you have no bucket, and the well is deep: from 16 whence have you the water of life? John 4:12 Can it be that you are greater than our father Jacob, who gave us this well, and drank from it, and his children, and his sheep? 17 John 4:13 Jesus answered and said unto her, Every one that drinks of this water shall thirst 18 again: John 4:14 but whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall not thirst for ever: but the water which I shall give him shall be in him a spring of water springing 19 up unto eternal life. John 4:15 That woman said unto him, My Lord, give me of this water, that 20 I may not thirst again, neither come and draw water from here. John 4:16 Jesus said unto her, 21 [Arabic, p. 83] Go and call your husband, and come hither. John 4:17 She said unto him, I have no 22 husband. John 4:18 Jesus said to her, You said well, I have no husband: five husbands have you had, and this *man* whom you have now is not your husband; and 23 in this you said truly. John 4:19 That woman said unto him, My Lord, I perceive you to 24 be a prophet. John 4:20 Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and you say that in Jerusalem 25 is the place in which worship must be. John 4:21 Jesus said unto her, Woman, believe me, an hour comes, when neither in this mountain, nor yet in Jerusalem, shall you worship 26 the Father. John 4:22 You worship that which you know not: but we worship that which 27 we know: for salvation is of the Jews. John 4:23 But an hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: and the Father also 28 seeks such as these worshippers. John 4:24 For God is a Spirit: and they that worship him 29 must worship him in spirit and in truth. John 4:25 That woman said unto him, I know that 30 the Messiah comes: John 4:26 and when he has come, he will teach us everything. Jesus said unto her, I that speak unto you am he.

31 John 4:27 And while he was speaking, his disciples came; and they wondered how he would speak with a woman; but not one of them said unto him, What do you seek? Or, 32 What do you speak with her? John 4:28 And the woman left her waterpot, and went to the 33 city, and said to the people, John 4:29 Come, and see a man who told me all that *ever* I did: 34 perhaps then he is the Messiah. John 4:30 And people went out from the city, and came to 35 him. John 4:31 And in the mean while his disciples besought him, and said unto him, Our 36, 37 master, eat. John 4:32 And he said unto them, I have food to eat that you know not. John 4:33 And the disciples said among themselves, Can any one have brought him anything to eat? 38 John 4:34 Jesus said unto them, My food is to do the will of him that sent me, and to accomplish 39 [Arabic, p. 84] his work. John 4:35 Said ye not that after four months comes the harvest? Behold, I therefore say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and behold the lands, 40 that they have become white, and the harvest is already come. John 4:36 And he that reaps receives his wages, and gathers the fruit of eternal life; and the sower and 41 the reaper rejoice together. John 4:37 For in this is found the word of truth, One sows, and 42 another reaps. John 4:38 And I sent you to reap that in which you have not laboured: others laboured, and you have entered on their labour.

43 John 4:39 And from that city many of the Samaritans believed in him because of the words 44 of that woman, who testified and said, He told me all that *ever* I did. John 4:40 And when those Samaritans came unto him, they besought him to abide with them; and he 45, 46 abode with them two days. John 4:41 And many believed in him because of his word; John 4:42 and they said to that woman, Now not because of your saying have we believed in him: we have heard and known that this truly is the Messiah, the Saviour of the world.

47, 48 John 4:43 And after two days Jesus went out thence and departed to Galilee. John 4:44 And Jesus 49 testified that a prophet is not honoured in his own city. John 4:45a And when he came to Galilee, the Galilæans received him.
