# Section 28

1, 2 [Arabic, p. 107] John 7:2 And at that time the feast of tabernacles of the Jews drew near. John 7:3 So the brethren of Jesus said unto him, Remove now hence, and go to Judæa, that 3 your disciples may see the deeds that you do. John 7:4 For no man does a thing secretly 4 and wishes to be apparent. John 7:5 If you do this, show yourself to the world. For 5 up to this time not even the brethren of Jesus believed on him. John 7:6 Jesus said unto them, My time till now has not arrived; but as for you, your time is always ready. 6 John 7:7 It is not possible for the world to hate you; but me it hates, for I bear witness 7 against it, that its deeds are evil. John 7:8 As for you, go ye up unto this feast: but I go 8 not up now to this feast; for my time has not yet been completed. John 7:9 He said this, and remained behind in Galilee.

9 But when his brethren went up unto the feast, he journeyed from Galilee, and 10 came to the borders of Judæa, to *the country* beyond Jordan; Matthew 19:2 and there came after 11 him great multitudes, and he healed them all there. John 7:10b And he went out, and proceeded 12 to the feast, not openly, but as one that conceals himself. John 7:11 And the Jews sought him 13 at the feast, and said, In what place is this *man?* John 7:12 And there occurred much murmuring there in the great multitude that came to the feast, on his account. For 14 some said, He is good: and others said, Nay, but he leads the people astray. John 7:13 But no man spoke of him openly for fear of the Jews.

15 [Arabic, p. 108] John 7:14 But when the days of the feast of tabernacles were half over, Jesus went 16 up to the temple, and taught. John 7:15 And the Jews wondered, and said, How does 17 this man know writing, seeing he has not learned? John 7:16 Jesus answered and said, My doctrine 18 is not mine, but his that sent me. John 7:17 Whoever wishes to do his will understands my doctrine, whether it be from God, or whether I speak of my own accord. 19 John 7:18 Whosoever speaks of his own accord seeks praise for himself; but whosoever seeks praise for him that sent him, he is true, and unrighteousness in his heart 20 there is none. John 7:19 Did not Moses give you the law, and no man of you keeps the 21 law? John 7:20 Why do you seek to kill me? The multitude answered and said unto him, You 22 have demons: who seeks to kill you? John 7:21 Jesus answered and said unto them, I did 23 one deed, and you all marvel because of this. John 7:22 Moses has given you circumcision (not because it is from Moses, but it is from the fathers); and you on the sabbath 24 circumcise a man. John 7:23 And if a man is circumcised on the sabbath day, that the law of Moses may not be broken; are you angry at me, because I healed on the sabbath 25 day the whole man? John 7:24 Judge not with hypocrisy, but judge righteous judgement.

26 John 7:25 And some people from Jerusalem said, Is not this he whom they seek to slay? 27 John 7:26 And lo, he discourses with them openly, and they say nothing unto him. Think 28 you that our elders have learned that this is the Messiah indeed? John 7:27 But this man is known whence he is; and the Messiah, when he comes, no man knows whence 29 he is. John 7:28 So Jesus lifted up his voice as he taught in the temple, and said, You both know me, and know whence I am; and of my own accord am I not come, but he 30 [Arabic, p. 109] that sent me is true, he whom you know not: John 7:29 but I know him; for I am 31 from him, and he sent me. John 7:30 And they sought to seize him: and no man 32 laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come. John 7:31 But many of the multitude believed on him; and they said, The Messiah, when he comes, can it be that he will do more than these signs that this *man* does?

33 Luke 12:13 And a man of that multitude said unto our Lord, Teacher, say to my brother 34 that he divide with me the inheritance. Luke 12:14 Jesus said unto him, Man, who is it that 35 appointed me over you as a judge and divider? Luke 12:15 And he said unto his disciples, Take heed within yourselves of all inordinate desire; for it is not in abundance of 36 possessions that life shall be. Luke 12:16 And he gave them this parable: The ground of a 37 rich man brought forth abundant produce: Luke 12:17 and he pondered within himself, and 38 said, What shall I do, since I have no place to store my produce? Luke 12:18 And he said, I will do this: I will pull down the buildings of my barns, and build them, and make 39 them greater; and store there all my wheat and my goods. Luke 12:19 And I will say to my soul, Soul, you have much goods laid by for many years; take your ease, eat, 40 drink, enjoy yourself. Luke 12:20 God said unto him, O *you* of little intelligence, this night shall your soul be taken from you; and this that you have prepared, whose shall it 41 be? Luke 12:21 So is he that lays up treasures for himself, and is not rich in God.

42 Mark 10:17 And while Jesus was going in the way, there came near to him a young man of the rulers, and fell on his knees, and asked him, and said, Good Teacher, what is 43 it that I must do that I may have eternal life? Mark 10:18 Jesus said unto him, Why do you call 44 me good, while there is none good but the one, *even* God? Mark 10:19a You know the commandments. 45 If you would enter into life, keep the commandments. The young [Arabic, p. 110] man said unto him, Which of the commandments? Jesus said unto him, 46 Mark 10:19b You shall not commit adultery, You shall not steal, You shall not kill, You shall not bear false witness, You shall not do injury, Honour your father 47 and your mother: and, Love your neighbour as yourself. That young man said unto 48 him, All these have I kept from my youth: what then is it that I lack? Mark 10:21a And Jesus 49 looked intently at him, and loved him, and said unto him, Matthew 19:21b If you would be perfect, what you lack is one thing: go away and sell everything that you have, and give to the poor, and you shall have treasure in heaven: and take your 50 cross, and follow me. And that young man frowned at this word, and went away 51 feeling sad; for he was very rich. And when Jesus saw his sadness, he looked towards his disciples, and said unto them, How hard it is for them that have possessions to enter the kingdom of God!
