# Section 23

1 Matthew 15:29 And Jesus departed thence, and came to the side of the sea of Galilee, and went 2 up into the mountain, and sat there. Matthew 15:30a And there came unto him great multitudes, having with them lame, and blind, and dumb, and maimed, and many others, and 3 they cast them at the feet of Jesus: John 4:45b for they had seen all the signs which he did in 4 Jerusalem, when they were gathered at the feast. Matthew 15:30b And he healed them all. Matthew 15:31 And those multitudes marvelled when they saw dumb *men* speak, and maimed *men* healed, and lame *men* walk, and blind *men* see; and they praised the God of Israel.

5 Matthew 15:32 And Jesus called his disciples, and said unto them, I have compassion on this multitude, because of their continuing with me three days, having nothing to eat; and to send them away fasting I am not willing, lest they faint in the way, Mark 8:3b some of them having 6 [Arabic, p. 89] come from far. Matthew 15:33 His disciples said unto him, Whence have we in the desert 7 bread wherewith to satisfy all this multitude? Matthew 15:34 Jesus said unto them, How 8 many loaves do you have? Matthew 15:35 They said unto him, Seven, and a few small fishes. And he 9 commanded the multitudes to sit down upon the ground; Matthew 15:36 and he took those seven loaves and the fish, and blessed, and broke, and gave to his disciples to set before 10 them; and the disciples set before the multitudes. Matthew 15:37 And they all ate, and were satisfied: and they took that which remained over of the fragments, seven basketfuls. 11 Matthew 15:38 And the people that ate were four thousand men, besides the women and children. 12 Matthew 15:39 And when the multitudes departed, he went up into the boat, and came to the borders of Magada.

13 And the Pharisees and Sadducees came to him, and began to seek a discussion with him. And they asked him to show them a sign from heaven, tempting him. 14 And Jesus sighed within himself, and said, What sign seeks this evil and adulterous generation? It seeks a sign, and it shall not be given a sign, except the sign 15 of Jonah the prophet. Mark 8:12b Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not be given a 16 sign. Mark 8:13 And he left them, and went up into the boat, and went away to that side.

17 Mark 8:14 And his disciples forgot to take with them bread, and there was not with them 18 in the boat, not even one loaf. Mark 8:15 And Jesus charged them, and said, Take heed, and guard yourselves from the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees, and from the 19 leaven of Herod. Matthew 16:7 And they reflected within themselves that they had taken with them 20 no bread. Matthew 16:8 And Jesus knew, and said unto them, Why do you think within yourselves, O *you* of little faith, and are anxious, because you have no bread? Mark 8:17b Until now do you not perceive or understand? Is your heart yet hard? Mark 8:18 And do you have eyes, and *yet* see not? 22 [Arabic, p. 90] And do you have ears, and *yet* hear not? Mark 8:19 And do you not remember when I broke those five loaves for five thousand? And how many baskets full of broken 23 pieces you took up? They said, Twelve. Mark 8:20 He said unto them, And the seven also for four thousand: how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up? They 24 said, Seven. He said unto them, How have you not understood that I spoke not to you because of the bread, but that you should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees 25 and Sadducees? Matthew 16:12 Then they understood that he spoke, not that they should beware of the leaven of the bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees, which he called leaven.

26 Mark 8:22 And after that, he came to Bethsaida. And they brought to him a certain blind 27 *man*, and besought him that he would touch him. Mark 8:23 And he took the hand of that blind man, and led him out without the village, and spat in his eyes, and laid his 28 hand on him, and asked him, What do you see? Mark 8:24 And that blind man looked intently, 29 and said unto him, I see men as trees walking. Mark 8:25 And he placed his hand 30 again on his eyes; and they were restored, and he saw everything clearly. Mark 8:26 And he sent him to his house, and said, Do not enter even into the village, nor tell any man in the village.

31 Mark 8:27a And Jesus went forth, and his disciples, to the villages of Cæsarea Philippi. 32 Matthew 16:13b And while he was going in the way, and his disciples alone, he asked his disciples, 33 and said, What do men say of me that I am, the Son of man? Matthew 16:14 They said unto him, Some say, John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the 34, 35 prophets. Matthew 16:15 He said unto them, And ye, what say ye that I am? Matthew 16:16 Simon Cephas answered 36 [Arabic, p. 91] and said, You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God. Matthew 16:17 Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah: flesh and 37 blood has not revealed *it* unto you, but my Father which is in heaven. Matthew 16:18 And I say unto you also, that you are Cephas, and on this rock will I build my church; and the 38 gates of Hades shall not prevail against it. Matthew 16:19 To you will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and 39 whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Matthew 16:20 And he sternly charged his disciples, and warned them that they should not tell any man concerning him, 40 that he was the Messiah. Matthew 16:21a And henceforth began Jesus to show to his disciples 41 that he was determined to go to Jerusalem, Mark 8:31b and suffer much, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and of the scribes, and be killed, and on the 42 third day rise. Mark 8:32a And he was speaking plainly. Matthew 16:22 And Simon Cephas, as one grieved 43 for him, said, Far be you, my Lord, from that. Mark 8:33a And he turned, and looked upon 44 his disciples, and rebuked Simon, and said, Matthew 16:23b Get behind me, Satan: for you are a stumblingblock unto me: for you think not of what pertains to God, but of what pertains to men.

45 And Jesus called the multitudes with his disciples, and said unto them, Whosoever would come after me, let him deny himself, and take his cross every day, and 46 come after me. Mark 8:35 And whosoever would save his life shall lose it; and whosoever 47 loses his life for my sake, and for the sake of my gospel, shall save it. Luke 9:25 What shall 48 a man profit, if he gain all the world, and destroy his own life, or lose it? Mark 8:37 or what 49 [Arabic, p. 92] will a man give *in* ransom for his life? Mark 8:38 Whosoever shall deny me and my sayings in this sinful and adulterous generation, the Son of man also will 50 deny him, when he comes in the glory of his Father with his holy angels. Matthew 16:27 For the Son of man is about to come in the glory of his Father with his holy angels; and then shall he reward each man according to his works.
