# Section 29

1 Matthew 19:23 Verily I say unto you, It is difficult for a rich man to enter the kingdom of 2 heaven. Matthew 19:24 And I say unto you also, that it is easier for a camel to enter the eye of 3 a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God. Mark 10:24 And the disciples were wondering at these sayings. And Jesus answered and said unto them again, My children, how hard it is for those that rely on their possessions to enter the 4 kingdom of God! Mark 10:26 And those that were listening wondered more, and said among 5 themselves, being agitated, Who, do you think, can be saved? Mark 10:27 And Jesus looked at them intently, and said unto them, With men this is not possible, but with God *it is:* 6 [Arabic, p. 111] it is possible for God to do everything. Simon Cephas said unto him, Lo, we have left everything, and followed you; what is it, do you think, that we 7 shall have? Matthew 19:28 Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, You that have followed me, in the new world, when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory, you also 8 shall sit on twelve thrones, and shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Mark 10:29b Verily I say unto you, No man leaves houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or kinsfolk, or lands, because of the kingdom of God, or for 9 my sake, and the sake of my gospel, Luke 18:30 who shall not obtain many times as much in this 10 time, and in the world to come inherit eternal life: Mark 10:30b and now in this time, houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecution; 11 and in the world to come *ever*lasting life. Mark 10:31 Many that are first shall be last, and that are last shall be first.

12 Luke 16:14 And when the Pharisees heard all this, because of their love for wealth they 13 scoffed at him. Luke 16:15 And Jesus knew what was in their hearts, and said unto them, You are they that justify yourselves before men; while God knows your hearts: the thing that is lofty with men is base before God.

14 Luke 16:19 And he began to say, A *certain* man was rich, and wore silk and purple, and enjoyed 15 himself every day in splendour: Luke 16:20 and there was a poor man named Lazarus, and 16 he was cast down at the door of the rich man, Luke 16:21 afflicted with sores, and he longed to fill [Arabic, p. 112] his belly with the crumbs that fell from the table of that rich man; yea, 17 even the dogs used to come and lick his sores. Luke 16:22 And it happened that that poor man died, and the angels conveyed him into the bosom of Abraham: and the 18 rich man also died, and was buried. Luke 16:23 And while he was being tormented in Hades, 19 he lifted up his eyes from afar, and saw Abraham with Lazarus in his bosom. Luke 16:24 And he called with a loud voice, and said, My father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus to wet the tip of his finger with water, and moisten my tongue 20 for me; for, behold, I am burned in this flame. Luke 16:25 Abraham said unto him, My son, remember that you received your good things in your life, and Lazarus his afflictions: 21 but now, behold, he is at rest here, and you are tormented. Luke 16:26 And in addition to all this, there is between us and you a great abyss placed, so that they that would cross unto you from hence cannot, nor yet from thence do they cross unto 22 us. Luke 16:27 He said unto him, Then I beseech you, my father, to send him to my father's 23 house; Luke 16:28 for I have five brethren; let him go, that they also sin not, and come to 24 the abode of this torment. Luke 16:29 Abraham said unto him, They have Moses and the 25 prophets; let them hear them. Luke 16:30 He said unto him, Nay, my father Abraham: but 26 let a man from the dead go unto them, and they will repent. Luke 16:31 Abraham said unto him, If they listen neither to Moses nor to the prophets, neither if a man from the dead rose would they believe him.

27 Matthew 20:1 The kingdom of heaven is like a man that is a householder, which went out early 28 in the morning to hire labourers for his vineyard. Matthew 20:2 And he agreed with the labourers on 29 one penny a day for each labourer, and he sent them into his vineyard. Matthew 20:3 And he went 30 [Arabic, p. 113] out in three hours, and saw others standing in the market idle. Matthew 20:4 He said unto them, Go ye also into my vineyard, and what is right I will pay you. 31 Matthew 20:5 And they went. And he went out also at the sixth and the ninth hour, and did likewise, 32 and sent them. Matthew 20:6 And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle. He said unto them, Why are you standing the whole day idle? 33 Matthew 20:7 They said unto him, Because no one has hired us. He said unto them, Go ye 34 also into the vineyard, and what is right you shall receive. Matthew 20:8 So when evening came, the lord of the vineyard said unto his steward, Call the labourers, and pay them 35 their wages; and begin with the later ones, and end with the former ones. Matthew 20:9 And 36 those of eleven hours came, and received each a penny. Matthew 20:10 When therefore the first came, they supposed that they should receive something more; and they also 37 received each a penny. Matthew 20:11 And when they received *it*, they spoke angrily against the 38 householder, and said, Matthew 20:12 These last worked one hour, and you have made them equal 39 with us, who have suffered the heat of the day, and its burden. Matthew 20:13 He answered and said unto one of them, My friend, I do you no wrong: *was it* not for a penny *that* 40 you bargained with me? Matthew 20:14 Take what is yours, and go your way; for I wish to 41 give this last as I have given you. Matthew 20:15 Or am I not entitled to do with what is mine 42 what I choose? Matthew 20:16 Or is your eye perchance evil, because I am good? Thus shall the last *ones* be first, and the first last. The called are many, and the chosen are few.

43 Luke 14:1 And when Jesus entered into the house of one of the chiefs of the Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day, and they were watching him to see what he would 44, 45 do, Luke 14:2 and there was before him a man which had the dropsy, Luke 14:3 Jesus answered and 46 said unto the scribes and the Pharisees, Is it lawful on the sabbath to heal? Luke 14:4 But [Arabic, p. 114] they were silent. So he took him, and healed him, and sent him away. 47 Luke 14:5 And he said unto them, Which of you shall *have* his son or his ox fall on the sabbath day into a well, and not lift him up straightway, and draw water for 48 him? Luke 14:6 And they were not able to answer him a word to that.
