# Section 27

1 Matthew 18:23 Therefore the kingdom of heaven is like a certain king, who would make a 2 reckoning with his servants. Matthew 18:24 And when he began to make *it*, they brought to him one who 3 owed him ten talents. Matthew 18:25 And because he had not wherewith to pay, his lord ordered that he should be sold, he, and his wife, and children, and all that he 4 had, and payment be made. Matthew 18:26 So that servant fell down and worshipped *him*, and said unto him, My lord, have patience with me, and I shall pay you everything. 5 Matthew 18:27 And the lord of that servant had compassion, and released him, and forgave him his 6 debt. Matthew 18:28 And that servant went out, and found one of his fellow- *servants*, who owed him [Arabic, p. 104] a hundred pence; and he took him, and dealt severely with him, and said 7 unto him, Give me what you owe. Matthew 18:29 So the fellow-servant fell down at his 8 feet, and besought him, and said, Grant me respite, and I will pay you. Matthew 18:30 And he would not; but took him, and cast him into prison, till he should give him his debt. 9 Matthew 18:31 And when their fellow- *servants* saw what happened, it distressed them much; and 10 they came and told their lord of all that had taken place. Matthew 18:32 Then his lord called him, and said unto him, *You* wicked servant, all that debt I forgave you, because 11 you besought me: Matthew 18:33 was it not then incumbent on you also to have mercy on your 12 fellow-servant, as I had mercy on you? Matthew 18:34 And his lord became angry, and delivered 13 him to the scourgers, till he should pay all that he owed. Matthew 18:35 So shall my Father which is in heaven do unto you, if one forgive not his brother his wrong conduct from 14 his heart. Luke 17:3 Take heed within yourselves: if your brother sin, rebuke him; and if he 15 repent, forgive him. Luke 17:4 And if he act wrongly towards you seven times in a day, and on that day return seven times unto you, and say, I repent towards you; forgive him. 16 Matthew 18:15 And if your brother act wrongly towards you, go and reprove him between you and 17 him alone: if he hear you, you have gained your brother. Matthew 18:16 But if he hear you not, take with you one or two, and so at the mouth of two or three every saying shall 18 be established. Matthew 18:17 And if he listen not to these also, tell the congregation; and if he listen not even to the congregation, let him be unto you as a publican and a Gentile. 19 Matthew 18:18 Verily I say unto you, All that you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: 20 and what ye loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Matthew 18:19 I say unto you also, If two of you agree on earth to ask, everything shall be granted them from my Father 21 [Arabic, p. 105] which is in heaven. Matthew 18:20 For where two or three are gathered in my name, there 22 am I among them. Matthew 18:21 Then Cephas drew near to him, and said unto him, My Lord, how many times, if my brother act wrongly towards me, should I forgive him? 23 until seven times? Matthew 18:22 Jesus said unto him, I say not unto you, Until seven; but, Until seventy 24 times seven, seven. Luke 12:47 And the servant that knows his lord's will, and makes not 25 ready for him according to his will, shall meet with much punishment; Luke 12:48 but he that knows not, and does something for which he merits punishment, shall meet with slight punishment. Every one to whom much has been given, much shall be asked of him; and he that has had much committed to him, much shall be 26 required at his hand. Luke 12:49 I came to cast fire upon the earth; and I would that it had 27 been kindled already. Luke 12:50 And I have a baptism to be baptized with, and greatly am 28 I straitened till it be accomplished. Matthew 18:10 See *that you* despise not one of these little ones that believe in me. Verily I say unto you, Their angels at all times see the 29 face of my Father which is in heaven. Matthew 18:11 The Son of man came to save the thing which was lost.

30 John 7:1 And after that, Jesus walked in Galilee; and he did not like to walk in Judæa, 31 because the Jews sought to kill him. Luke 13:1 And there came people who told him of 32 the Galilæans, those whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. Luke 13:2 Jesus answered and said unto them, Do ye imagine that those Galilæans were sinners 33 more than all the Galilæans, so that this thing has come upon them? Luke 13:3 Nay. Verily I say unto you now, that you shall all also, if you repent not, likewise perish. 34 Luke 13:4 Or perchance those eighteen on whom the palace fell in Siloam, and slew them, do ye imagine that they were to be condemned more than all the people that dwell 35 [Arabic, p. 106] in Jerusalem? Nay. Luke 13:5 Verily I say unto you, If you do not all repent, you shall perish like them.

36 Luke 13:6 And he spoke unto them this parable: A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; 37 and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. Luke 13:7 So he said to the husbandman, Lo, three years do I come and seek fruit on this fig tree, and find 38 none: cut it down; why does it render the ground unoccupied? Luke 13:8 The husbandman said unto him, My lord, leave it this year also, that I may dig about it, and dung 39 it; Luke 13:9 then if it bear fruit—! And if not, then cut it down in the coming year.

40 Luke 13:10 And when Jesus was teaching on the sabbath day in one of the synagogues, 41 there was there a woman that had a spirit of disease eighteen years; Luke 13:11 and she was 42 bowed down, and could not straighten herself at all. Luke 13:12 And Jesus saw her, and called 43 her, and said unto her, Woman, be loosed from your disease. Luke 13:13 And he put his hand 44 upon her; and immediately she was straightened, and praised God. Luke 13:14 And the chief of the synagogue answered with anger, because Jesus had healed on a sabbath, and said unto the multitudes, There are six days in which work ought to be done; 45 come in them and be healed, and not on the sabbath day. Luke 13:15 But Jesus answered and said unto him, *You* hypocrites, does not each of you on the sabbath day loose 46 his ox or his ass from the manger, and go and water it? Luke 13:16 Ought not this woman, who is a daughter of Abraham, and whom the devil has bound eighteen years, 47 to be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day? Luke 13:17 And when he said this, they were all put to shame, those standing, who were opposing him: and all the people were pleased with all the wonders that proceeded from his hand.
