# Section 34

1 Then went the Pharisees and considered how they might ensnare him in a word, 2 and deliver him into the power of the judge, and into the power of the ruler. Matthew 22:16 And they sent unto him their disciples, with the kinsfolk of Herod; and they said unto him, [Arabic, p. 129] Teacher, we know that you speak the truth, and teachest the way of God with equity, and art not lifted up by any man: for you act not so as to 3 be seen of any man. Matthew 22:17 Tell us now, What is your opinion? Is it lawful that we should 4 pay the tribute to Cæsar, or not? Shall we give, or shall we not give? Mark 12:15a But Jesus knew 5 their deceit, and said unto them, Why do you tempt me, you hypocrites? Show me the 6 penny of the tribute. Matthew 22:20 So they brought unto him a penny. Jesus said unto them, To whom belongs this image and inscription? They said unto him, To Cæsar. 7, 8 Matthew 22:21 He said unto them, Give what is Cæsar's to Cæsar, and what is God's to God. Luke 20:26 And they could not make him slip in a *single* word before the people; and they marvelled at his word, and refrained.

9 Matthew 22:23 And on that day came the Sadducees, and said unto him, There is no life for 10 the dead. Matthew 22:24 And they asked him, and said unto him, Teacher, Moses said unto us, If a man die, not having children, let his brother take his wife, and raise up seed 11 for his brother. Now there *were* with us seven brethren: and the first took a wife, 12 and died without children; Luke 20:30 and the second took his wife, and died without children; 13 Luke 20:31 and the third also took her; and in like manner the seven of them also, and they 14, 15 died without leaving children. Matthew 22:27 And last of them all the woman died also. Matthew 22:28 At the resurrection, then, which of these seven shall have this woman? For all of them took 16 her. Jesus answered and said unto them, Is it not for this that you have erred, 17 because ye know not the scriptures, nor the power of God? Luke 20:34b And the sons of this 18 world take wives, and the women become the men's; Luke 20:35 but those that have become worthy of that world, and the resurrection from among the dead, do not take 19 [Arabic, p. 130] wives, and the women also do not become the men's. Luke 20:36 Nor is it possible that they should die; but they are like the angels, and are the children of 20 God, because they have become the children of the resurrection. For in the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read in the book of Moses, how from the bush God said unto him, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? 21 And God is not *the God* of the dead, but of the living: for all of them are alive with him. And you have erred greatly.

22, 23 Matthew 22:33 And when the multitudes heard, they were wondering at his teaching. Luke 20:39 And 24 some of the scribes answered and said unto him, Teacher, you have well said. Matthew 22:34 But the rest of the Pharisees, when they saw his silencing the Sadducees on this point, gathered against him to contend with him.

25 And one of the scribes, of those that knew the law, when he saw the excellence 26 of his answer to them, desired to try him, and said unto him, Luke 10:25b What shall I do to inherit eternal life? And, Mark 12:28b Which of the commandments is greater, and has precedence 27 in the law? Mark 12:29 Jesus said unto him, The first of all the commandments is, Hear, O 28 Israel; The Lord our God, the Lord is one: and you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your thought, and with all your 29, 30 strength. Matthew 22:38 This is the great and preëminent commandment. Mark 12:31 And the second, which is like it, is, You shall love your neighbour as yourself. And another commandment 31 greater than these two there is not. Matthew 22:40 On these two commandments, then, are hung the 32 [Arabic, p. 131] law and the prophets. Mark 12:32 That scribe said unto him, Excellent! My Master; you have said truly that he is one, and there is no other outside of him: 33 Mark 12:33 and that a man should love him with all his heart, and with all his thought, and with all his soul, and with all his strength, and that he should love his neighbour as 34 himself, is better than all savours and sacrifices. Mark 12:34a And Jesus saw him that he had answered wisely; and he answered and said unto him, You are not far from the 35, 36 kingdom of God. Luke 10:28b You have spoken rightly: do this, and you shall live. Luke 10:29 And he, as his desire was to justify himself, said unto him, And who is my neighbour? 37 Luke 10:30 Jesus said unto him, A man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho; and the robbers fell upon him, and stripped him, and beat him, his life remaining in him *but* little, 38 and went away. Luke 10:31 And it happened that there came down a certain priest that way; 39 and he saw him, and passed by. Luke 10:32 And likewise a Levite also came and reached 40 that place, and saw him, and passed by. Luke 10:33 And a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, 41 came to the place where he was, and saw him, and had compassion on him, Luke 10:34 and came near, and bound up his strokes, and poured on them wine and oil; and he set him on the ass, and brought him to the inn, and expended his care upon him. 42 Luke 10:35 And on the morrow of that day he took out two pence, and gave them to the innkeeper, and said unto him, Care for him; and if you spend upon him more, 43 when I return, I shall give you. Luke 10:36 Who of these three now, do you think, is nearest 44 to him that fell among the robbers? Luke 10:37 And he said unto him, He that had compassion 45 [Arabic, p. 132] on him. Mark 12:34b Jesus said unto him, Go, and do also likewise. And no man dared afterwards to ask him anything.

46 Luke 19:47 And he was teaching every day in the temple. But the chief priests and scribes and the elders of the people sought to destroy him: Luke 19:48 and they could not *find* what 47 they should do with him; and all the people were hanging upon him to hear him. 48 John 7:31 And many of the multitude believed on him, and said, The Messiah, when he 49 comes, can it be that he will do more than these signs that this *man* does? John 7:32 And the Pharisees heard the multitudes say that of him; and the chief priests sent 50 officers to seize him. John 7:33 And Jesus said unto them, I am with you *but* a short time 51 yet, and I go to him that sent me. John 7:34 And you shall seek me, and shall not find me: 52 and where I shall be, you shall not be able to come. John 7:35 The Jews said within themselves, Whither has this *man* determined to go that we shall not be able *to find* him? Can it be that he is determined to go to the regions of the nations, and teach 53 the heathen? John 7:36 What is this word that he said, You shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, you cannot come?
