# Section 37

1 John 9:39 And Jesus said, To judge the world am I come, so that they that see not may 2 see, and they that see may become blind. John 9:40 And some of the Pharisees which were 3 with him heard that, and they said unto him, Can it be that we are blind? John 9:41 Jesus said unto them, If you were blind, you should not have sin: but now ye say, We see: and because of this your sin remains.

4 [Arabic, p. 140] John 10:1 Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever enters not into the fold of the sheep by the door, but goes up from another place, that *man* is a thief and a 5, 6 stealer. John 10:2 But he that enters by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. John 10:3 And therefore the keeper of the door opens for him the door; and the sheep hear his voice: and 7 he calls his sheep by their names, and they go forth unto him. John 10:4 And when he puts forth his sheep, he goes before them, and his sheep follow him: because 8 they know his voice. John 10:5 And after a stranger will the sheep not go, but they flee from 9 him: because they hear not the voice of a stranger. John 10:6 This parable spoke Jesus unto them: but they knew not what he was saying unto them.

10 John 10:7 Jesus said unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the 11 sheep. John 10:8 And all that came are thieves and stealers: but the sheep heard them not. 12 John 10:9 I am the door: and if a man enter by me, he shall live, and shall go in and go out, 13 and shall find pasture. John 10:10 And the stealer comes not, save that he may steal, and kill, and destroy: but I came that they might have life, and that they might have 14 the thing *that is* better. John 10:11 I am the good shepherd; and the good shepherd gives 15 himself for his sheep. John 10:12 But the hireling, who is not a shepherd, and whose the sheep are not, when he sees the wolf as it comes, leaves the sheep, and flees, 16 and the wolf comes, and snatches away the sheep, and scatters them: John 10:13 and the 17 hireling flees because he is an hireling, and has no care for the sheep. John 10:14 I am the 18 good shepherd; John 10:15 and I know what is mine, and what is mine knows me, as my Father knows me, and I know my Father; and I give myself for the sheep. 19 John 10:16 And I have other sheep also, that are not of this flock: them also I must invite, and they shall hear my voice; and all the sheep shall be one, and the shepherd one. 20 [Arabic, p. 141] John 10:17 And therefore does my Father love me, because I give my life, that I may 21 take it again. John 10:18 No man takes it from me, but I leave it of my own choice. And I have the right to leave it, and have the right also to take it. And this commandment did I receive of my Father.

22 John 10:19 And there occurred a disagreement among the Jews because of these sayings. 23 John 10:20 And many of them said, He has a devil, and is afflicted with madness; why listen 24 ye to him? John 10:21 And others said, These sayings are not those of *men* possessed with demons. Can a demon haply open the eyes of a blind *man?*

25, 26 John 10:22 And the feast of the dedication came on at Jerusalem: and it was winter. John 10:23 And 27 Jesus was walking in the temple in the porch of Solomon. John 10:24 The Jews therefore surrounded him, and said unto him, Until when do you make our hearts anxious? 28 John 10:25 If you are the Messiah, tell us plainly. He answered and said unto them, I told you, and you believe not: and the deeds that I do in my Father's name bear witness 29, 30 to me. John 10:26 But ye believe not, because you are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. 31 John 10:27 And my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they come after me: John 10:28 and I give them eternal life; and they shall not perish for ever, nor shall any man snatch 32 them out of my hands. John 10:29 For the Father, who has given *them* unto me, is greater 33 than all; and no man is able to take *them* from the hand of my Father. John 10:30 I and 34, 35 my Father are one. John 10:31 And the Jews took stones to stone him. John 10:32 Jesus said unto them, Many good deeds from my Father have I showed you; because of which of them, 36 then, do ye stone me? John 10:33 The Jews said unto him, Not for the good deeds do we stone you, but because you blaspheme, and, while you are a man, makest yourself 37 God. John 10:34 Jesus said unto them, Is it not thus written in your law, I said, You are gods? 38 [Arabic, p. 142] John 10:35 And if he called those gods— for to them came the word of God (and it is 39 not possible in the scripture that *anything* should be undone)— John 10:36 he then, whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world, do ye say that he blasphemes; 40 because I said unto you, I am the Son of God? John 10:37 If then I do not the deeds of my 41 Father, you believe me not. John 10:38 But if I do, *even* if you believe not me, believe the deeds: that you may know and believe that my Father is in me, and I in my Father. 42 John 10:39 And they sought again to take him: and he went forth out of their hands.

43 John 10:40 And he went beyond Jordan to the place where John was baptizing formerly; 44 and abode there. John 10:41 And many people came unto him; and they said, John did not 45 work even one sign: but all that John said of this man is truth. John 10:42 And many believed in him.

46 John 11:1 And there was a sick *man*, named Lazarus, of the village of Bethany, the brother 47 of Mary and Martha. John 11:2 And Mary was she that anointed with sweet ointment the feet of Jesus, and wiped *them* with her hair; and Lazarus, who was sick, was the 48 brother of this *woman*. John 11:3 And his sisters sent unto Jesus, and said unto him, Our 49 Lord, behold, he whom you love is sick. John 11:4 But Jesus said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the glorifying of God, that the Son of God may be glorified 50, 51 because of it. John 11:5 And Jesus loved Martha, and Mary, and Lazarus. John 11:6 And when he 52 heard that he was sick, he abode in the place where he was two days. John 11:7 And after that, 53 he said unto his disciples, Come, let us go into Judæa. John 11:8 His disciples said unto him, Our [Arabic, p. 143] Master, now the Jews desire to stone you; and you are going there again? 54, 55 John 11:9 Jesus said unto them, Is not the day of twelve hours? If then a man walk in the day, he stumbles not, because he sees the light of the world. John 11:10 But if 56 a man walk in the night, he stumbles, because there is no lamp in him. John 11:11 This said Jesus: and after that, he said unto them, Lazarus our friend has fallen asleep; but 57 I am going to awaken him. John 11:12 His disciples said unto him, Our Lord, if he has 58 fallen asleep, he will recover. John 11:13 But Jesus said that concerning his death: while they 59 supposed that he spoke of lying down to sleep. John 11:14 Then Jesus said unto them plainly, 60 Lazarus is dead. John 11:15 And I am glad that I was not there for your sakes, that you may 61 believe; but let us go there. John 11:16 Thomas, who is called Thama, said to the disciples, his companions, Let us also go, and die with him.
