# Section 39

1 John 12:1 And Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany, where was Lazarus, 2 whom Jesus raised from among the dead. John 12:2 And they made a feast for him there: 3 and Martha was serving; while Lazarus was one of them that sat with him. Mark 14:3a And 4 at the time of Jesus' being at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, John 12:9 great multitudes of the Jews heard that Jesus was there: and they came, not because of Jesus alone, but [Arabic, p. 147] that they might look also on Lazarus, whom he raised from among the dead. 5, 6 John 12:10 And the chief priests considered *how* they might kill Lazarus also; John 12:11 because 7 many of the Jews were going on his account, and believing in Jesus. John 12:3a And Mary took a case of the ointment of fine nard, of great price, Mark 14:3b and opened it, and poured 8 it out on the head of Jesus as he was reclining; John 12:3b and she anointed his feet, and wiped them with her hair: and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment. 9, 10 John 12:4 But Judas Iscariot, one of the disciples, he that was to betray him, said, John 12:5 Why was 11 not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given unto the poor? John 12:6 This he said, not because of his care for the poor, but because he was a thief, and the chest 12 was with him, and what was put into it he used to bear. Mark 14:4 And that displeased the rest of the disciples also within themselves, and they said, Why went this ointment 13 to waste? Matthew 26:9 It was possible that it should be sold for much, and the poor be given 14 it. Mark 14:5b And they were angry with Mary. Matthew 26:10a And Jesus perceived *it*, and said unto them, Mark 14:6b Leave her; why molest ye her? A good work has she accomplished on me: John 12:7b for the 15 day of my burial kept she it. John 12:8a At all times the poor are with you, and when you 16 wish ye can do them a kindness: Mark 14:7b but I am not at all times with you. Matthew 26:12 And for this *cause*, when she poured this ointment on my body, it is as if she did it for my burial, 17 and anointed my body beforehand. And verily I say unto you, In every place where this my gospel shall be proclaimed in all the world, what she did shall be told for a memorial of her.

18, 19 [Arabic, p. 148] Luke 19:28 And when Jesus said that, he went out leisurely to go to Jerusalem. And when he arrived at Bethphage and at Bethany, beside the mount which is 20 called the mount of Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples, and he said unto them, Go 21 into this village that is opposite you: and when you enter it, you shall find an ass tied, and 22 a colt with him, which no man ever yet mounted: loose him, and bring them unto me. And if any man say unto you, Why loose ye them? Say unto him thus, We 23 seek them for our Lord; and straightway send them hither. All this was, that what was said in the prophet might be fulfilled, which said,

> 24 Matthew 21:5 Say ye unto the daughter of Zion,
> Behold, your King comes unto you,
> Meek, and riding upon an ass,
> And upon a colt the foal of an ass.

25 John 12:16 And the disciples did not know this at that time: but after that Jesus was glorified, his disciples remembered that these *things* were written of him, and *that* this 26 they had done unto him. And when the two disciples went, they found as he had 27 said unto them, and they did as Jesus charged them. And when they loosed them, 28 their owners said unto them, Why loose ye them? Luke 19:34 They said unto them, We seek 29 them for our Lord. And they let them *go*. And they brought the ass and the colt, 30 and they placed on the colt their garments; and Jesus mounted it. Matthew 21:8 And most of the multitudes spread their garments on the ground before him: and others cut branches 31 from the trees, and threw *them* in the way. Luke 19:37 And when he neared his descent from [Arabic, p. 149] the mount of Olives, all the disciples began to rejoice and to praise God with 32 a loud voice for all the powers which they had seen; and they said, Praise in the highest; Praise to the Son of David: Blessed is he that comes in the name 33 of the Lord; Mark 11:10a and blessed is the kingdom that comes, *that* of our father David: Luke 19:38c Peace in heaven, and praise in the highest.

34 John 12:12b And a great multitude, that which came to the feast, when they heard that Jesus 35 was coming to Jerusalem, took young palm branches, John 12:13 and went forth to meet him, and cried and said, Praise: Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, the 36 King of Israel. Luke 19:39 Certain therefore of the Pharisees from among the multitudes 37 said unto him, Our Master, rebuke your disciples. Luke 19:40 He said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If these were silent, the stones would cry out.

38, 39 Luke 19:41 And when he drew near, and saw the city, he wept over it, and said, Luke 19:42 Would that you had known the things that are for your peace, in this your day! now that is 40 hidden from your eyes. Luke 19:43 There shall come unto you days when your enemies 41 shall encompass you, and straiten you from every quarter, Luke 19:44 and shall get possession of you, and your children within you; and they shall not leave in you a stone upon another; because you knew not the time of your visitation.

42 Matthew 21:10 And when he entered into Jerusalem, the whole city was agitated, and they said, 43 Who is this? Matthew 21:11 And the multitudes said, This is Jesus, the prophet that is from Nazareth 44 of Galilee. John 12:17 And the multitude which was with him bore witness that he called 45 Lazarus from the grave, and raised him from among the dead. John 12:18 And for this *cause* great multitudes went out to meet him, because they heard the sign which he did.
