# Section 35

1 John 7:37 And on the great day, which is the last of the feast, Jesus stood, crying out and 2 saying, If *any* man is thirsty, let him come unto me, and drink. John 7:38 Every one that believes in me, as the scriptures said, there shall flow from his belly rivers of pure 3 water. John 7:39 He said that referring to the Spirit, which those who believed in him were to receive: for the Spirit was not yet granted; and because Jesus had not yet been 4 [Arabic, p. 133] glorified. John 7:40 And many of the multitude that heard his words said, This is 5 in truth the prophet. John 7:41 And others said, This is the Messiah. But others 6 said, Can it be that the Messiah will come from Galilee? John 7:42 Hath not the scripture said that from the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the village of David, the 7 Messiah comes? John 7:43 And there occurred a dissension in the multitude because of him. 8 John 7:44 And some of them were wishing to seize him; but no man laid a hand upon him.

9 John 7:45 And those officers came to the chief priests and Pharisees: and the priests said 10 unto them, Why did ye not bring him? John 7:46 The officers said, Never spoke man thus 11 as speaks this man. John 7:47 The Pharisees said unto them, Perhaps ye also have gone 12, 13 astray? John 7:48 Hath any of the rulers or the Pharisees haply believed in him? John 7:49 except 14 this people which knows not the law; they are accursed. John 7:50 Nicodemus, one of them, 15 he that had come to Jesus by night, John 7:51 said unto them, Does our law haply condemn 16 a man, except it hear him first and know what he has done? John 7:52 They answered and said unto him, Are you also haply from Galilee? Search, and see that a prophet rises not from Galilee.

17, 18 Matthew 22:41 And when the Pharisees assembled, Jesus asked them, and said, Matthew 22:42 What say ye of 19 the Messiah? Whose son is he? They said unto him, The son of David. Matthew 22:43 He said unto them, And how does David in the Holy Spirit call him Lord? For he said,

> 20 Matthew 22:44 The Lord said unto my Lord,
> Sit on my right hand,
> That I may put your enemies under your feet.

21, 22 Matthew 22:45 If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son? Matthew 22:46 And no one was able to answer him; and no man dared from that day again to ask him of anything.

23 John 8:12 And Jesus addressed them again, and said, I am the light of the world; and he that 24 follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall find the light of life. John 8:13 The Pharisees [Arabic, p. 134] said unto him, You bear witness to yourself; your witness is not true. John 8:14 Jesus 25 answered and said unto them, If I bear witness to myself, my witness is true; for I know whence I came, and where I go; but you know not whence I came, or 26, 27 where I go. John 8:15 And ye judge after the flesh; and I judge no man. John 8:16 And even if I judge, my judgement is true; because I am not alone, but I and my Father which 28, 29 sent me. John 8:17 And in your law it is written, that the witness of two men is true. John 8:18 I am he that bears witness to myself, and my Father which sent me bears witness to 30 me. John 8:19 They said unto him, Where is your Father? Jesus answered and said unto them, You know not me, nor my Father: for did ye know me, you would know my 31 Father. John 8:20 He said these sayings in the treasury, where he was teaching in the 32 temple: John 8:21 and no man seized him; because his hour had not yet come. Jesus said unto them again, I go truly, and you shall seek me and not find me, and you shall die 33 in your sins: and where I go, you cannot come. John 8:22 The Jews said, Will he haply kill 34 himself, that he says, Where I go, you cannot come? John 8:23 He said unto them, You are from below; and I am from above: you are of this world; and I am not of this 35 world. John 8:24 I said unto you, that you shall die in your sins: if you believe not that I am 36 he, you shall die in your sins. John 8:25 The Jews said, And you, who are you? Jesus said 37 unto them, If I should begin to speak unto you, John 8:26 I have concerning you many words and judgement: but he that sent me is true; and I, what I heard from him is what 38, 39 I say in the world. John 8:27 And they knew not that he meant by that the Father. John 8:28 Jesus [Arabic, p. 135] said unto them again, When you have lifted up the Son of man, then you shall know that I am he: and I do nothing of myself, but as my Father 40 taught me, so I speak. John 8:29 And he that sent me is with me; and my Father has not 41 left me alone; because I do what is pleasing to him at all times. John 8:30 And while he was saying that, many believed in him.

42 John 8:31 And Jesus said to those Jews that believed in him, If you abide in my words, truly 43 you are my disciples; John 8:32 and you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. 44 John 8:33 They said unto him, We are the seed of Abraham, and have never served any man 45 in the way of slavery: how then do you say, You shall be free children? John 8:34 Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Every one that does a sin is a slave of 46 sin. John 8:35 And the slave does not remain for ever in the house; but the son remains 47, 48 for ever. John 8:37 And if the Son set you free, truly you shall be free children. I know that you are the seed of Abraham; but you seek to slay me, because you are unable for my 49 word. John 8:38 And what I saw with my Father, I say: and what ye saw with your father, 50 ye do. John 8:39 They answered and said unto him, Our father is Abraham. Jesus said unto them, If you were the children of Abraham, you would do the deeds of Abraham. 51 John 8:40 Now, behold, you seek to kill me, a man that speak with you the truth, that I 52 heard from God: this did Abraham not do. John 8:41 And ye do the deeds of your father. They said unto him, We were not *born* of fornication; we have one Father, who is 53 God. John 8:42 Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, you would love me: I proceeded and came from God; and it was not of my own self that I came, but he sent 54 [Arabic, p. 136] me. John 8:43 Why then do ye not know my word? Because ye cannot hear my word. 55 John 8:44 You are from the father, the devil, and the lust of your father do ye desire to do, who from the beginning is a slayer of men, and in the truth stands not, because the truth is not in him. And when he speaks untruth, he speaks from 56 himself: for he is a liar, and the father of untruth. John 8:45 And I who speak the truth, you 57 believe me not. John 8:46 Who of you rebukes me for a sin? And if I speak the truth, you 58 do not believe me. John 8:47 Whosoever is of God hears the words of God: therefore do 59 ye not hear, because you are not of God. John 8:48 The Jews answered and said unto him, 60 Did we not say well that you are a Samaritan, and hast demons? John 8:49 Jesus said unto them, As for me, I have not a devil; but my Father do I honour, and you dishonour 61 me. John 8:50 I seek not my glory: here is one who seeks and judges.
