# Section 33

1 [Arabic, p. 125] Mark 11:19 And when evening came, Jesus went forth outside of the city, he and his 2 disciples. Mark 11:20 And as they passed in the morning, the disciples saw that fig tree 3 withered away from its root. Matthew 21:20b And they passed by, and said, How did the fig tree dry 4 up immediately? Mark 11:21 And Simon remembered, and said unto him, My Master, behold, 5 that fig tree which you cursed has dried up. Mark 11:22 And Jesus answered and said 6 unto them, Let there be in you the faith of God. Mark 11:23 Verily I say unto you, if you believe, and doubt not in your hearts, and assure yourselves that that will be which 7 ye say, you shall have what ye say. Matthew 21:21b And if you say to this mountain, Remove, and 8 fall into the sea, it shall be. Matthew 21:22 And all that you ask God in prayer, and believe, he 9, 10 will give you. Luke 17:5 And the apostles said unto our Lord, Increase our faith. Luke 17:6 He said unto them, If there be in you faith like a grain of mustard, you shall say to this fig tree, Be torn up, and be planted in the sea; and it will obey you. 11 Luke 17:7 Who of you has a servant driving a yoke of oxen or tending sheep, and if he 12 come from the field, will say unto him straightway, Go and sit down? Luke 17:8 Nay, he will say unto him, Make ready for me wherewith I may sup, and gird your waist, and serve me, till I eat and drink; and afterwards you shall eat and drink also. 13 Luke 17:9 Does that servant haply, who did what he was bid, receive his praise? I think 14 not. Luke 17:10 So ye also, when you have done all that you were bid, say, We are idle servants; what it was our duty to do, we have done.

15 Mark 11:24 For this reason I say unto you, Whatever ye pray and ask, believe that you 16 [Arabic, p. 126] receive, and you shall have. Mark 11:25 And when you stand to pray, forgive what is in your heart against *any* man; and your Father which is in heaven will 17 forgive you also your wrong-doings. Mark 11:26 But if you forgive not men their wrong-doings, neither will your Father forgive you also your wrong-doings.

18 Luke 18:1 And he spoke unto them a parable also, that they should pray at all times, and 19 not be slothful: Luke 18:2 There was a judge in a city, who feared not God, nor was ashamed 20 for men: Luke 18:3 and there was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, and said, 21 Avenge me of mine adversary. Luke 18:4 And he would not for a long time: but afterwards he said within himself, If of God I have no fear, and before men I have no shame; 22 Luke 18:5 *yet* because this widow vexes *me*, I will avenge her, that she come not at all times 23, 24 and annoy me. Luke 18:6 And our Lord said, Hear ye what the judge of injustice said. Luke 18:7 And shall not God *still* more do vengeance for his elect, who call upon him in the night 25 and *in* the day, and grant them respite? Luke 18:8 I say unto you, He will do vengeance for them speedily. Do you think the Son of man will come and find faith on the earth?

26, 27 Mark 11:15a And they came again to Jerusalem. Luke 20:1 And it came to pass, on one of the days, as Jesus was walking in the temple, and teaching the people, and preaching *the* 28 *gospel*, Luke 20:2a that the chief priests and the scribes with the elders came upon him, and said unto him, Tell us: Mark 11:28b By what power do you do this? And who gave you this 29 power to do that? And Jesus said unto them, I also will ask you one word, and if 30 ye tell me, I also shall tell you by what power I do that. Matthew 21:25a The baptism of John, from 31 what place *is* it? From heaven or of men? Mark 11:30b Tell me. Matthew 21:25b And they reflected within themselves, [Arabic, p. 127] and said, If we shall say unto him, From heaven; he will say unto 32 us, For what reason did ye not believe him? Matthew 21:26a But if we shall say, Of men; 33 we fear that the people will stone us, all of them. And all of them were holding 34 to John, that he was a true prophet. Mark 11:33 They answered and said unto him, We know 35 not. Matthew 21:28 Jesus said unto them, Neither tell I you also by what power I work. What do you think? A man had two sons; and he went to the first, and said unto him, My 36 son, go today, and till in the vineyard. Matthew 21:29 And he answered and said, I do not wish 37 to: but finally he repented, and went. Matthew 21:30 And he went to the other, and said unto 38 him likewise. Matthew 21:31 And he answered and said, Yea, my lord: and went not. Which of these two did the will of his father? They said unto him, The first. Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, The publicans and harlots go before you into 39 the kingdom of God. Matthew 21:32 John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and you believed him not; but the publicans and harlots believed him; and you, not even when you saw, did ye repent at last, that you might believe in him.

40 Matthew 21:33a Hear another parable: A man was a householder, and planted a vineyard, and surrounded it with a hedge, and dug in it a winepress, and built in it a tower, 41, 42 and gave it to husbandmen, and went to a distance for a long time. Mark 12:34 So when the time of the fruits came, he sent his servants unto the husbandmen, that they might 43 send him of the produce of his vineyard. Mark 12:3b And those husbandmen beat him, and 44 sent him away empty. Mark 12:4 And he sent unto them another servant also; and they 45 stoned him, and wounded him, and sent him away with shameful handling. Mark 12:5a And he sent again another; and they slew him. And he sent many other servants unto 46 them. Matthew 21:35 And the husbandmen took his servants, and one they beat, and another they 47 stoned, and another they slew. Matthew 21:36 So he sent again other servants more than the first; and 48 [Arabic, p. 128] they did likewise with them. Luke 20:13 So the owner of the vineyard said, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son: it may be they will see him and be 49, 50 ashamed. Mark 12:6a So at last he sent unto them his beloved son that he had. Matthew 21:38a But the husbandmen, when they saw the son, said among themselves, This is the heir. 51, 52 Luke 20:14b And they said, We will slay him, and so the inheritance will be ours. Matthew 21:39 So they took 53 him, and put him forth without the vineyard, and slew him. Matthew 21:40 When then the lord 54 of the vineyard shall come, what will he do with those husbandmen? Matthew 21:41 They said unto him, He will destroy them in the worst of ways, and give the vineyard to 55 other husbandmen, who will give him fruit in its season. Matthew 21:42a Jesus said unto them, Have ye never read in the scripture,

> The stone which the builders declared to be base,
> Luke 20:17b The same came to be at the head of the corner:
> 56 Matthew 21:42c From God was this,
> And it is wonderful in our eyes?

57 Matthew 21:43 Therefore I say unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and 58 given to a people that will produce fruit. Matthew 21:44 And whosoever falls on this stone shall be broken in pieces: but on whomsoever it falls, it will grind him to 59 powder. Matthew 21:45 And when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they 60 perceived that it was concerning them he spoke. Matthew 21:46 And they sought to seize him; and they feared the multitude, because they were holding to him as the prophet.
