# Section 30

1 Luke 14:7 And he spoke a parable unto those which were bidden there, because he saw 2 them choose the places that were in the highest part of the sitting room: Luke 14:8 When a man invites you to a feast, do not go and sit at the head of the room; lest there 3 be there a man more honourable than you, Luke 14:9 and he that invited you come and say to you, Give the place to this man: and you be ashamed when you rise and 4 take another place. Luke 14:10 But when you are invited, go and sit last; so that when he that invited you comes, he may say unto you, My friend, go up higher: and 5 you shall have praise before all that were invited with you. Luke 14:11 For every one that exalts himself shall be abased; and every one that abases himself shall be exalted.

6 Luke 14:12 And he said also to him that had invited him, When you make a feast or a banquet, do not invite your friends, nor even your brethren, nor your kinsmen, nor your 7 rich neighbours; lest haply they also invite you, and you have this reward. Luke 14:13 But when you make a feast, invite the poor, and those with withered hand, and the 8 lame, and the blind: Luke 14:14 and blessed are you, since they have not the means to reward 9 you; that your reward may be at the rising of the righteous. Luke 14:15 And when one of them that were invited heard that, he said unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.

10, 11 Jesus answered again in parables, and said, Luke 14:16b The kingdom of heaven has been likened [Arabic, p. 115] to a certain king, which made a feast for his son, and prepared a 12 great banquet, and invited many: and he sent his servants at the time of the feast to inform them that were invited, Everything is made ready for you; come. And 13 they would not come, but began all of them with one voice to make excuse. Luke 14:18 And the first said unto them, Say to him, I have bought a field, and I must needs go out 14 to see it: Luke 14:19 I pray you to release me, for I ask to be excused. And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going to examine them: I pray you 15 to release me, for I ask to be excused. Luke 14:20 And another said, I have married a wife, 16 and therefore I cannot come. Matthew 22:4 And the king sent also other servants, and said, Say to those that were invited, that my feast is ready, and my oxen and my fatlings are 17 slain, and everything is ready: come to the feast. Matthew 22:5 But they made light of it, and 18 went, one to his field, and another to his merchandise: Matthew 22:6 and the rest took his 19 servants, and entreated them shamefully, and killed them. Luke 14:21a And one of the servants 20 came, and informed his lord of what had happened. Matthew 22:7 And when the king heard, he became angry, and sent his armies; and they destroyed those murderers, and 21 burned their cities. Matthew 22:8 Then he said to his servants, The feast is prepared, but those 22 that were invited were not worthy. Luke 14:21c Go out quickly into the markets and into the partings of the ways of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and those with pains, and the lame, and the blind. And the servants did as the king commanded them. 23 Luke 14:22 And they came, and said unto him, Our lord, we have done all that you commanded 24 us, and there is here still room. So the lord said unto his servants, Go out into the roads, and the ways, and the paths, and every one that you find, invite 25 [Arabic, p. 116] to the feast, and constrain them to enter, till my house is filled. I say unto you, that no one of those people that were invited shall taste of my feast. 26 Matthew 22:10 And those servants went out into the roads, and gathered all that they found, good and 27 bad: and the banquet-house was filled with guests. Matthew 22:11 And the king entered to see those 28 who were seated, and he saw there a man not wearing a festive garment: Matthew 22:12 and he said unto him, My friend, how did you come in here not having on festive garments? 29 Matthew 22:13 And he was silent. Then the king said to the servants, Bind his hands and his feet, and put him forth into the outer darkness; there shall be weeping and 30 gnashing of teeth. Matthew 22:14 The called are many; and the chosen, few.

31 John 5:1a And after that, the time of the feast of unleavened bread of the Jews arrived, 32 and Jesus went out to go to Jerusalem. And as he went in the way, there met him 33 ten persons who were lepers, and stood afar off: Luke 17:13 and they lifted up their voice, and 34 said, Our Master, Jesus, have mercy upon us. Luke 17:14 And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go and show yourselves unto the priests. And when they went, they 35 were cleansed. Luke 17:15 And one of them, when he saw himself cleansed, returned, and 36 was praising God with a loud voice; Luke 17:16 and he fell on his face before the feet of 37 Jesus, giving him thanks: and this *man* was a Samaritan. Luke 17:17 Jesus answered and said, 38 Were not those that were cleansed ten? Where then are the nine? Luke 17:18 Not one of them turned aside to come and praise God, but this *man* who is of a strange 39 people. Luke 17:19 He said unto him, Arise, and go your way; for your faith has given you life.

40 Mark 10:32 And while they were going up in the way to Jerusalem, Jesus went in front of them; and they wondered, and followed him fearing. And he took his twelve disciples apart, 41 and began to tell them privately what was about to befall him. Luke 18:31b And he said unto [Arabic, p. 117] them, We are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things shall be fulfilled 42 that are written in the prophets concerning the Son of man. Mark 10:33b He shall be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, 43 and deliver him to the peoples; Mark 10:34a and they shall treat him shamefully, and scourge 44 him, and spit in his face, and humble him, and crucify him, and slay him: Luke 18:33 and on 45 the third day he shall rise. Luke 18:34 But they understood not one thing of this; but this word was hidden from them, and they did not perceive these things that were addressed to them.

46 Matthew 20:20 Then came near to him the mother of the (two) sons of Zebedee, she and her (two) sons, and worshipped him, and asked of him a *certain* thing. Matthew 20:21a And he said 47 unto her, What would you? Mark 10:35 And James and John, her two sons, came forward, and said unto him, Teacher, we would that all that we ask you would 48 do unto us. Mark 10:36 He said unto them, What would ye that I should do unto you? 49 Mark 10:37 They said unto him, Grant us that we may sit, the one on your right, and the other 50 on your left, in your kingdom and your glory. Mark 10:38 And Jesus said unto them, You know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink the cup that I am to drink? And with the 51 baptism that I am to be baptized with, will you be baptized? Mark 10:39 And they said unto him, We are able. Jesus said unto them, The cup that I drink you shall drink; and 52 with the baptism wherewith I am baptized you shall be baptized: Mark 10:40 but that you should sit on my right and on my left is not mine to give; but *it is* for him for whom my Father has prepared *it*.
