# Section 32

1 And when Jesus entered Jerusalem, he went up to the temple of God, and found 2 there oxen and sheep and doves. Matthew 21:12b And when he beheld those that sold and those that bought, and the money-changers sitting, John 2:14b he made for himself a scourge of rope, and drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep and the oxen, and the money-changers; Matthew 21:12c and he threw down their money, and upset their tables, and the seats of 3 them that sold the doves; Matthew 21:13 and he was teaching, and saying unto them, Is it not written, My house is a house of prayer for all peoples? And you have made it a den 4 for robbers. John 2:16 And he said unto those that sold the doves, Take this hence, and 5 make not my Father's house a house of merchandise. Mark 11:16 And he suffered not any 6 one to carry vessels inside the temple. John 2:17 And his disciples remembered the scripture, 7 The zeal of your house has eaten me up. John 2:18 The Jews answered and said unto him, 8 What sign have you shown us, that you do this? John 2:19 Jesus answered and said unto 9 them, Destroy this temple, and I shall raise it in three days. John 2:20 The Jews said unto him, This temple was built in forty-six years, and will you raise it in three days? 10 John 2:21 But he spoke unto them of the temple of his body, that when they destroyed it, he 11 [Arabic, p. 122] would raise it in three days. John 2:22 When therefore he rose from among the dead, his disciples remembered that he said this; and they believed the scriptures, and the word that Jesus spoke.

12 Mark 12:41 And when Jesus sat down over against the treasury, he observed how the multitudes were casting their offerings into the treasury: and many rich *men* were 13, 14 throwing in much. Mark 12:42a And there came a poor widow, and cast in two mites. Luke 21:3 And Jesus called his disciples, and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, This poor 15 widow cast into the treasury more than all the people: Mark 12:44a and all of these cast into the place of the offering of God of the superfluity of their wealth; while this *woman* of her want threw in all that she possessed.

16 Luke 18:9 And he spoke unto them this parable, concerning people who trusted in themselves 17 that they are righteous, and despised every man: Luke 18:10 Two men went up to the 18 temple to pray; one of them a Pharisee, and the other a publican. Luke 18:11 And the Pharisee stood apart, and prayed thus, O Lord, I thank you, since I am not like the rest of men, the unjust, the profligate, the extortioners, or even like this publican; 19 Luke 18:12 but I fast two days a week, and tithe all my possessions. Luke 18:13 And the publican was 20 standing at a distance, and he would not even lift up his eyes to heaven, but was 21 beating upon his breast, and saying, O Lord, have mercy on me, me the sinner. Luke 18:14 I say unto you, that this man went down justified to his house more than the Pharisee. Every one that exalts himself shall be abased; and every one that abases himself shall be exalted.

22 [Arabic, p. 123] And when eventide had come, he left all the people, and went outside the 23 city to Bethany, he and his twelve, and he remained there. Luke 9:11 And all the people, because they knew the place, came to him, and he received them; and them that 24 had need of healing he healed. Mark 11:12 And on the morning of the next day, when he returned 25 to the city from Bethany, he hungered. Mark 11:13 And he saw a fig tree at a distance on the beaten highway, having on it leaves. And he came unto it, *expecting* to find something on it; and when he came, he found nothing on it but the leaves— it was not 26 the season of figs— Mark 11:14 and he said unto it, Henceforward for ever let no man eat fruit of you. And his disciples heard.

27 And they came to Jerusalem. And there was there a man of the Pharisees, 28 named Nicodemus, ruler of the Jews. John 3:2 This *man* came unto Jesus by night, and said unto him, My Master, we know that you have been sent from God as a teacher; and no man can do these signs that you do, except him whom God is 29 with. John 3:3 Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man 30 be not born a second *time*, he cannot see the kingdom of God. John 3:4 Nicodemus said unto him, How can a man who is old be born? Can he, think you, return again to 31 his mother's womb a second time, to enter and be born? John 3:5 Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man be not born of water and the Spirit, 32 he cannot enter the kingdom of God. John 3:6 For he that is born of flesh is flesh; and he that 33 is born of Spirit is spirit. John 3:7 Wonder not that I said unto you that you must be born a 34 [Arabic, p. 124] second *time*. John 3:8 The wind blows where it lists, and you hear its voice, but you know not from what place it comes, nor whither it goes: so 35 is every man that is born of the Spirit. John 3:9 Nicodemus answered and said unto him, 36 How can that be? John 3:10 Jesus answered and said unto him, Are you teaching Israel, 37 and *yet* know not these things? John 3:11 Verily, verily, I say unto you, What we know 38 we say, and what we have seen we witness: and you receive not our witness. John 3:12 If I said unto you what is on earth, and you believed not, how then, if I say unto you 39 what is in heaven, will you believe? John 3:13 And no man has ascended up into heaven, except him that descended from heaven, the Son of man, which is in heaven. 40 John 3:14 And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so is the Son of man to be 41 lifted up; John 3:15 so that every man who may believe in him may not perish, but have 42 eternal life. John 3:16 God so loved the world, that he should give his only Son; and so every one that believes in him should not perish, but should have eternal life. 43 John 3:17 God sent not his Son into the world to judge the world; but that the world might 44 be saved by his hand. John 3:18 He that believes in him shall not be judged: but he that believes not is condemned beforehand, because he has not believed in the name 45 of the only *Son*, the Son of God. John 3:19 This is the judgement, that the light came into the world, and men loved the darkness more than the light; because their deeds 46 were evil. John 3:20 Whosoever does evil deeds hates the light, and comes not to the 47 light, lest his deeds be reproved. John 3:21 But he that does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be known, that they have been done in God.
