# Section 31

1 Mark 10:41 And when the ten heard, they were moved with anger against James and John. 2 Mark 10:42 And Jesus called them, and said unto them, You know that the rulers of the nations 3 are their lords; and their great men are set in authority over them. Mark 10:43 Not thus shall it [Arabic, p. 118] be among you: but he among you that would be great, let him be to you a 4 servant; Mark 10:44 and whoever of you would be first, let him be to every man a 5 bond-servant: Matthew 20:28 *even* as the Son of man also came not to be served, but to serve, and 6 to give himself a ransom in place of the many. Luke 13:22 He said this, and was going about 7 the villages and the cities, and teaching; and he went to Jerusalem. Luke 13:23 And a man asked him, Are those that shall be saved few? Jesus answered and said unto 8 them, Strive ye to enter at the narrow door: Luke 13:24 I say unto you now, that many shall 9 seek to enter, and shall not be able — Luke 13:25 from the time when the master of the house rises, and closes the door, and you shall be standing without, and shall knock at the door, and shall begin to say, Our lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and 10 say, I say unto you, I know you not whence you are: Luke 13:26 and you shall begin to say, 11 Before you we ate and drank, and in our markets did you teach; Luke 13:27 and he shall say unto you, I know you not whence you are; depart from me, you servants 12 of untruth. Luke 13:28 There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, while you are 13 put forth without. Luke 13:29 And they shall come from the east and the west, and from the 14 north and the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. Luke 13:30 And there shall then be last that have become first, and first that have become last.

15, 16 Luke 19:1 And when Jesus entered and passed through Jericho, Luke 19:2 there was a man named Zacchæus, 17 rich, and chief of the publicans. Luke 19:3 And he desired to see Jesus who he was; and he was not able for the pressure of the crowd, because Zacchæus was little of stature. 18 [Arabic, p. 119] Luke 19:4 And he hastened, and went before Jesus, and went up into an unripe fig 19 tree to see Jesus: for he was to pass thus. Luke 19:5 And when Jesus came to that place, he saw him, and said unto him, Make haste, and come down, Zacchæus: 20 today I must be in your house. Luke 19:6 And he hastened, and came down, and received 21 him joyfully. Luke 19:7 And when they all saw, they murmured, and said, He has gone in 22 and lodged with a man that is a sinner. Luke 19:8 So Zacchæus stood, and said unto Jesus, My Lord, now half of my possessions I give to the poor, and what I have unjustly 23 taken from every man I give him fourfold. Luke 19:9 Jesus said unto him, Today is salvation 24 come to this house, because this *man* also is a son of Abraham. Luke 19:10 For the Son of man came to seek and save the thing that was lost.

25 And when Jesus went out of Jericho, he and his disciples, there came after him 26 a great multitude. Luke 18:35b And there was a blind man sitting by the way side begging. 27 And his name was Timæus, the son of Timæus. And he heard the sound of the 28 multitude passing, and asked, Who is this? Luke 18:37 They said unto him, Jesus the Nazarene 29 passes by. And when he heard that it was Jesus, he called out with a loud 30 voice, and said, Jesus, son of David, have mercy on me. Luke 18:39a And those that went before Jesus were rebuking him, that he should hold his peace: Mark 10:48b but he cried the 31 more, and said, Son of David, have mercy on me. Mark 10:49 And Jesus stood, and commanded that they should call him. And they called the blind man, and said unto 32 him, Be of good courage, and rise; for, behold, he calls you. Mark 10:50 And the blind 33 man threw away his garment, and rose, and came to Jesus. Mark 10:51 Jesus said unto him, What do you wish that I should do unto you? And that blind man said unto him, My Lord and Master, that my eyes may be opened, so that I may see you. 34 [Arabic, p. 120] Matthew 20:34a And Jesus had compassion on him, and touched his eyes, and said unto 35 him, See; for your faith has saved you. And immediately he received his sight, and came after him, and praised God; and all the people that saw praised God.

36 Luke 19:11b And he spoke a parable because he was nearing Jerusalem, and they supposed 37 that at that time the kingdom of God was about to appear. Luke 19:12 He said unto them, A man, a son of a great race, went into a far country, to receive a kingdom, and 38 return. Luke 19:13 And he called his ten servants, and gave them ten shares, and said unto 39 them, Trade till the time of my coming. Luke 19:14 But the people of his city hated him, and 40 sent messengers after him, and said, We will not that this *man* reign over us. Luke 19:15 And when he had received a kingdom, and returned, he said that the servants to whom he had given the money should be called unto him, that he might know what each 41 of them had traded. Luke 19:16 And the first came, and said, My lord, your share has gained 42 ten shares. Luke 19:17 The king said unto him, You good and faithful servant, who has 43 been found faithful in a little, be set over ten districts. Luke 19:18 And the second came, 44 and said, My lord, your portion has gained five portions. Luke 19:19 And he said unto him 45 also, And you shall be set over five districts. Luke 19:20 And another came, and said, My 46 lord, here is your portion, which was with me laid by in a napkin: Luke 19:21 I feared you, because you are a hard man, and take what you did not leave, and seek 47 what you did not give, and reap what you did not sow. Luke 19:22 His lord said unto him, From your mouth shall I judge you, you wicked and idle servant, who was untrustworthy. You knew that I am a hard man, and take what I did not 48 leave, and reap what I did not sow: Luke 19:23 why did you not put my money at usury, 49 and so I might come and seek it, with its gains? Luke 19:24 And he said unto those that were standing in front of him, Take from him the share, and give it to him that has 50, 51 [Arabic, p. 121] ten shares. Luke 19:25 They said unto him, Our lord, he has ten shares. Luke 19:26 He said unto them, I say unto you, Every one that has shall be given unto; and 52 he that has not, that which he has also shall be taken from him. Luke 19:27 And those mine enemies who would not that I should reign over them, bring them, and slay them before me.
