# Section 48

1 John 18:1 This said Jesus, and went forth with his disciples to a place which was called Gethsemane, Matthew 26:36 on the side that is in the plain of Kidron, the mountain, the place 2 in which was a garden; and he entered there, he and his disciples. John 18:2 And Judas the 3 betrayer knew that place: for Jesus oft-times met with his disciples there. And when Jesus came to the place, he said to his disciples, Sit ye here, so that I may go and pray; 4, 5 [Arabic, p. 181] and pray ye, that you enter not into temptations. And he took with him Cephas and the sons of Zebedee together, James and John; and he began to 6 look sorrowful, and to be anxious. Matthew 26:38 And he said unto them, My soul is distressed unto 7 death: abide ye here, and watch with me. Luke 22:41a And he withdrew from them a little, 8 the space of a stone's throw; Mark 14:35b and he kneeled, and fell on his face, and prayed, so 9 that, if it *were* possible, this hour *might* pass him. Mark 14:36a And he said, Father, you are able for all things; if you will, let this cup pass me: Luke 22:42b but let not my will be *done*, 10 but let your will be *done*. And he came to his disciples, and found them sleeping; 11 and he said unto Cephas, Simon, did you sleep? Matthew 26:40b Could ye thus not for one hour 12 watch with me? Watch and pray, that you enter not into temptations: the spirit is 13 willing and ready, but the body is weak. Matthew 26:42 And he went again a second time, and prayed, and said, My Father, if it is not possible with regard to this cup that it pass, 14 except I drink it, your will be *done*. Mark 14:40 And he returned again, and found his disciples sleeping, for their eyes were heavy from their grief and anxiety; and they knew not 15 what to say to him. Matthew 26:44 And he left them, and went away again, and prayed a third 16 time, and said the very same word. Luke 22:43 And there appeared unto him an angel from 17 heaven, encouraging him. Luke 22:44 And being afraid he prayed continuously: and his sweat 18 [Arabic, p. 182] became like a stream of blood, and fell on the ground. Luke 22:45a Then he rose from 19 his prayer, and came to his disciples, and found them sleeping. And he 20 said unto them, Sleep now, and rest: Mark 14:41b the end has arrived, and the hour has come; 21 and behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. Arise, let us go: for he has come that betrays me.

22 Matthew 26:47 And while he was still speaking, came Judas the betrayer, one of the twelve, and with him a great multitude carrying lanterns and torches John 18:3 and swords and staves, from the chief priests and scribes and elders of the people, and with him the footsoldiers 23 of the Romans. And Judas the betrayer gave them a sign, and said, He whom I shall kiss, he is he: take him with care, and lead him *away*.

24 John 18:4a And Jesus, because he knew everything that should come upon him, went forth 25 unto them. And immediately Judas the betrayer came to Jesus, and said, Peace, 26 my Master; and kissed him. Luke 22:48b And Jesus said unto him, Judas, with a kiss do you betray the Son of man? *Was it* for that you came, my friend? And Jesus said 28 to those that came unto him, Whom do you seek? They said unto him, Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus said unto them, I am he. And Judas the betrayer also was standing 29 with them. John 18:6 And when Jesus said unto them, I am he, they retreated backward, and 30 fell to the ground. John 18:7 And Jesus asked them again, Whom do you seek? They answered, 31 Jesus the Nazarene. John 18:8 Jesus said unto them, I told you that I am he: and if you seek 32 me, let these go away: that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke, John 18:9 Of those 33 [Arabic, p. 183] whom you have given me I lost not even one. Matthew 26:50c Then came those that were with Judas, and seized Jesus, and took him.

34 Luke 22:49 And when his disciples saw what happened, they said, Our Lord, shall we smite 35 them with swords? John 18:10 And Simon Cephas had a sword, and he drew it, and struck the servant of the chief priest, and cut off his right ear. And the name of that servant 36 was Malchus. John 18:11a Jesus said unto Cephas, The cup which my Father has given 37 me, shall I not drink it? Put the sword into its sheath: for all that take with the 38 sword shall die by the sword. Matthew 26:53 Do you think that I am not able to ask of my 39 Father, and he shall now raise up for me more than twelve tribes of angels? Matthew 26:54 Then 40 how should the scriptures which were spoken be fulfilled, that thus it must be? Luke 22:51b Your 41 leave in this. Matthew 26:55 And he touched the ear of him that was struck, and healed it. And in that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, As they come out against a thief are you come out against me with swords and staves to take me? Daily was I with you in 42 the temple sitting teaching, and you took me not: Luke 22:53b but this is your hour, and the power 43 of darkness. Matthew 26:56 And that was, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.

44 John 18:12a Then the disciples all left him, and fled. And the footsoldiers and the officers 45 and the soldiers of the Jews seized Jesus, and came. Mark 14:51 And a certain young man 46 followed him, and he was wrapped in a towel, naked: Mark 14:52 and they seized him; so he 47 [Arabic, p. 184] left the towel, and fled naked. Then they took Jesus, and bound him, and brought him to Annas first; because he was the father in law of Caiaphas, 48 who was chief priest that year. John 18:14 And Caiaphas was he that counselled the Jews, that it was necessary that one man should die instead of the people.

49 John 18:15 And Simon Cephas and one of the other disciples followed Jesus. And the chief 50 priest knew that disciple, and he entered with Jesus into the court; John 18:16 but Simon was standing without at the door. And that other disciple, whom the chief priest knew, 51 went out and spoke unto her that kept the door, and she brought Simon in. John 18:17a And when the maid that kept the door saw Simon, she looked steadfastly at him, and said unto him, Are you not also one of the disciples of this man, I mean Jesus the 52 Nazarene? But he denied, and said, Woman, I know him not, neither do I even know 53 what you say. John 18:18a And the servants and the soldiers rose, and made a fire in the 54 middle of the court, that they might warm themselves; for it was cold. Luke 22:55a And when 55 the fire burned up, they sat down around it. And Simon also came, and sat down with them to warm himself, that he might see the end of what should happen.
