# Section 41

1 Matthew 23:34 Therefore, behold, I, the wisdom of God, am sending unto you prophets, and apostles, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them you shall slay and crucify; and some of them you shall beat in your synagogues, and persecute from city to 2 city: Matthew 23:35 that there may come on you all the blood of the righteous that has been poured upon the ground from the blood of Abel the pure to the blood of Zachariah the son of Barachiah, whom you slew between the temple and the altar. 3 Matthew 23:36 Verily I say unto you, All these *things* shall come upon this generation.

4 [Arabic, p. 155] Matthew 23:37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, slayer of the prophets, and stoner of them that are sent unto her! How many times did I wish to gather your children, as 5 a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and you would not! Matthew 23:38 Your house shall 6 be left over you desolate. Matthew 23:39 Verily I say unto you, You shall not see me henceforth, till you shall say Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

7 John 12:42 And many of the rulers also believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they 8 were not confessing *him*, lest they be put out of the synagogue: John 12:43 and they loved 9 the praise of men more than the praising of God. John 12:44 And Jesus cried and said, 10 Whosoever believes in me, believes not in me, but in him that sent me. John 12:45 And 11 whosoever sees me has seen him that sent me. John 12:46 I have come a light into the 12 world, and so every one that believes in me abides not in the darkness. John 12:47 And whosoever hears my sayings, and keeps them not, I judge him not: for I came 13 not to judge the world, but to give the world life. John 12:48 Whosoever wrongs me, and receives not my sayings, there is one that judges him: the word that I spoke, it 14 shall judge him at the last day. John 12:49 I from myself did not speak: but the Father which sent me, he has given me commandment, what I should say, and what I 15 should speak; and I know that his commandment is eternal life. John 12:50 The things that I say now, as my Father has said unto me, *even* so I say.

16 Luke 11:53 And when he said that unto them, the scribes and Pharisees began their evil-doing, being angry with *him*, and finding fault with his sayings, and harassing him 17 in many things; Luke 11:54 seeking to catch something from his mouth, that they might be able to calumniate him.

18 Luke 12:1 And when there gathered together myriads of great multitudes, which almost trode [Arabic, p. 156] one upon another, Jesus began to say unto his disciples, Preserve yourselves 19 from the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. Luke 12:2 For there is nothing 20 concealed, that shall not be revealed: nor hid, that shall not be known. Luke 12:3 Everything that you have said in the darkness shall be heard in the light; and what you have spoken secretly in the ears in the inner chambers shall be proclaimed on the roofs.

21, 22 John 12:36b This said Jesus, and he went and hid himself from them. John 12:37 But notwithstanding 23 his having done all these signs before them, they believed not in him: John 12:38 that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, who said,

> My Lord, who is he that has believed to hear us?
> And the arm of the Lord, to whom has it appeared?

24 John 12:39 And for this reason it is not possible for them to believe, because Isaiah also said,

> 25 John 12:40 They have blinded their eyes, and made dark their heart;
> That they may not see with their eyes, and understand with their heart,
> And turn,
> So that I should heal them.

26 John 12:41 This said Isaiah when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.

27 Matthew 24:1 And when Jesus went out of the temple, certain of his disciples came forward 28 to show him the buildings of the temple, and its beauty and greatness, and the strength of the stones that were laid in it, and the elegance of its building, and that 29 it was adorned with noble stones and beautiful colours. Matthew 24:2a Jesus answered and said 30 unto them, See ye these great buildings? verily I say unto you, Days will come, when there shall not be left here a stone upon another, that shall not be cast down.

31 Mark 14:1 And two days before the passover of unleavened bread, the chief priests and 32 the scribes sought how they might take him by deceit, and kill him: Mark 14:2 and they said, It shall not be at the feast, lest the people be agitated.

33 Mark 13:3 And when Jesus sat on the mount of Olives opposite the temple, his disciples, Simon Cephas and James and John and Andrew, came forward unto him, and said unto him 34 between themselves and him, Teacher, tell us when that shall be, and what is the sign 35 [Arabic, p. 157] of your coming and the end of the world. Jesus answered and said unto them, Days will come, when you shall long to see one of the days of the Son of 36, 37 Matthew 24:5a man, and shall not behold. Luke 21:8b Take heed lest any man lead you astray. Many shall 38 come in my name, and say, I am the Messiah; and they shall say, The time has come 39 near, and shall lead many astray: go not therefore after them. And when you hear of wars and tidings of insurrections, see *to it*, be not agitated: for these *things* must 40 first be; only the end is not yet come. Matthew 24:7a Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom 41 against kingdom: Luke 21:11 and great earthquakes shall be in one place and another, and there shall be famines and deaths and agitations: and there shall be fear and terror and great signs that shall appear from heaven, and there shall be great 42, 43 storms Matthew 24:8 All these *things* are the beginning of travail. Luke 21:12 But before all of that, they shall lay hands upon you, and persecute you, and deliver you unto the synagogues 44 and into prisons, and bring you before kings and judges for my name's sake. Luke 21:13 And 45 that shall be unto you for a witness. Mark 13:10 But first must my gospel be preached unto all 46 nations. Luke 12:11 And when they bring you into the synagogues before the rulers and the authorities, be not anxious beforehand how you shall answer for yourselves, or what ye 47, 48 shall say: Mark 13:11b because it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Spirit. Luke 21:14 Lay it to your heart, not 49 [Arabic, p. 158] to be anxious before the time what you shall say: Luke 21:15 and I shall give you understanding and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay. 50 Matthew 24:9 And then shall they deliver you unto constraint, and shall kill you: and you shall be 51 hated of all nations because of my name. Matthew 24:30 And then shall many go astray, and they 52 shall hate one another, and deliver one another unto death. Luke 21:16 And your parents, and your brethren, and your kinsfolk, and your friends shall deliver you up, and shall 53, 54 slay some of you. Luke 21:18 But a lock of hair from your heads shall not perish. Luke 21:19 And by 55 your patience you shall gain your souls. Matthew 24:11 And many *men*, false prophets, shall arise, 56 and lead many astray. Matthew 24:12 And because of the abounding of iniquity, the love of many 57 shall wax cold. Matthew 24:13 But he that endures to the end, the same shall be saved. Matthew 24:14 And 58 this, the gospel of the kingdom, shall be preached in all the world for a testimony to all nations; and then shall come the end of all.
