# Section 40

1 [Arabic, p. 150] Matthew 21:14 And when Jesus entered the temple, they brought unto him blind and 2 lame: and he healed them. Matthew 21:15 But when the chief priests and the Pharisees saw the wonders that he did, and the children that were crying in the temple and 3 saying, Praise be to the Son of David: it distressed them, Matthew 21:16 and they said, Do you not hear what these say? Jesus said unto them, Yea: did ye not read long ago, From 4 the mouths of children and infants you have chosen my praise? John 12:19 And the Pharisees said one to another, Behold, do ye not see that nothing avails us? For lo, the whole world has followed him.

5 John 12:20 And there were among them certain Gentiles also, which had come up to worship 6 at the feast: John 12:21 these therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, 7 and asked him, and said unto him, My lord, we wish to see Jesus. John 12:22 And Philip 8 came and told Andrew: and Andrew and Philip told Jesus. John 12:23 And Jesus answered and said unto them, The hour has come near, in which the Son of man is to be glorified. 9 John 12:24 Verily, verily, I say unto you, A grain of wheat, if it fall not and die in the 10 earth, remains alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit. John 12:25 He that loves his life destroys it; and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it unto the life eternal. 11 John 12:26 If a man serve me, he will follow me; and where I am, there shall my servant be 12 also: and whosoever serves me, the Father will honour him. John 12:27 Now is my soul troubled: [Arabic, p. 151] and what shall I say? My Father, deliver me from this hour. But 13 for this cause came I unto this hour. John 12:28 My Father, glorify your name. And a 14 voice was heard from heaven, I have glorified *it*, and shall glorify *it*. John 12:29 And the multitude that were standing heard, and said, This is thunder: and others said, An 15 angel speaks to him. John 12:30 Jesus answered and said unto them, Not because of me 16 was this voice, but because of you. John 12:31 Now is the judgement of this world; and the 17 prince of this world shall now be cast forth. John 12:32 And I, when I am lifted up from the 18 earth, shall draw every man unto me. John 12:33 This he said, that he might show by what 19 manner of death he should die. John 12:34 The multitudes said unto him, We have heard out of the law that the Messiah abides for ever: how then do you say, that the Son of 20 man is to be lifted up? Who is this, the Son of man? John 12:35 Jesus said unto them, Another little while is the light with you. Walk so long as you have light, lest the darkness overtake you; for he that walks in the darkness knows not whither he goes. 21 John 12:36 So long as you have light, believe the light, that you may be the children of the light.

22 Luke 17:20 And when certain of the Pharisees asked of Jesus, when the kingdom of God should come, he answered and said unto them, The kingdom of God comes not 23 with expectation: Luke 17:21 neither shall they say, Lo, it is here! nor, Lo, it is there! For the kingdom of God is within you.

24 Luke 21:37 And in the day *time* he was teaching in the temple; and at night he used to go 25 out, and pass the night in the mount called the mount of Olives. Luke 21:38 And all the people came to him in the morning in the temple, to hear his word.

26, 27 Matthew 23:1 Then spoke Jesus unto the multitudes and his disciples, and said unto them, Matthew 23:2 On 28 [Arabic, p. 152] the seat of Moses are seated the scribes and Pharisees: Matthew 23:3 everything that they say unto you now to keep, keep and do: but according to their deeds 29 do ye not; for they say, and do not. Matthew 23:4 And they bind heavy burdens, and lay them on the shoulders of the people; while they with one of their fingers will not come 30, 31 near them. Matthew 23:5a But all their deeds they do to make a show before men. Mark 12:37b And all the multitude were hearing that with pleasure.

32 Mark 12:38 And in the course of his teaching he said unto them, Guard yourselves from the 33 scribes, who desire to walk in robes, Mark 12:39 and love salutation in the marketplaces, and sitting in the highest places of the synagogues, and at feasts in the highest parts of 34 the rooms: Matthew 23:5b and they broaden their amulets, and lengthen the cords of their cloaks, 35 Matthew 23:7b and *love* that they should be called by men, My master, Mark 12:40 and devour widows' houses, because of their prolonging their prayers; these then shall receive greater judgement. 36 Matthew 23:8 But you, be ye not called masters: for your master is one; all you are brethren. 37 Matthew 23:9 Call not then to yourselves *any one* father on earth: for your Father is one, who is 38 in heaven. Matthew 23:10 And be not called directors: for your director is one, *even* the Messiah. 39, 40 Matthew 23:11 He that is great among you shall be unto you a minister. Matthew 23:12 Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and whosoever shall abase himself shall be exalted.

41 Luke 11:43 Woe unto you, Pharisees! Because ye love the highest places in the synagogues, and salutation in the marketplaces.

42 Matthew 23:14 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye devour widows' houses, because of your prolonging your prayers: for this *reason* then you shall receive greater judgement.

43 Matthew 23:13a Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you have shut the kingdom of God before men.

44 [Arabic, p. 153] Luke 11:52a Woe unto you that know the law! For you concealed the keys of knowledge: Matthew 23:13b ye enter not, and those that are entering ye suffer not to enter.

45 Matthew 23:15 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye compass land and sea to draw one proselyte; and when he is *become so*, you make him a son of hell twice as much as yourselves.

46 Matthew 23:16 Woe unto you, you blind guides! Because ye say, Whosoever swears by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever swears by the gold that is in the temple, 47 shall be condemned. Matthew 23:17 You blind foolish *ones*: which is greater, the gold, or the 48 temple which sanctifies the gold? Matthew 23:18 And, Whosoever swears by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever swears by the offering that is upon it, shall be condemned. 49 Matthew 23:19 You blind foolish *ones*: which is greater, the offering, or the altar which sanctifies 50 the offering? Matthew 23:20 Whosoever then swears by the altar, has sworn by it, and by all 51 that is upon it. Matthew 23:21 And whosoever swears by the temple, has sworn by it, and by 52 him that is dwelling in it. Matthew 23:22 And whosoever swears by heaven, has sworn by the throne of God, and by him that sits upon it.

53 Matthew 23:23 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye tithe mint and rue and dill and cummin and all herbs, and you leave the important *matters* of the law, judgement, and mercy, and faith, and the love of God: this ought ye to do, and 54 not to leave that *undone*. Matthew 23:24 You blind guides, which strain out a gnat, and swallow camels.

55 Matthew 23:25 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter, while the inside of them is full of injustice and wrong. 56 Matthew 23:26 You blind Pharisees, cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the platter, then shall the outside of them be cleansed.

57 [Arabic, p. 154] Matthew 23:27 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye resemble whited sepulchres, which appear from the outside beautiful, but within 58 full of the bones of the dead, and all uncleanness. Matthew 23:28 So ye also from without appear unto men like the righteous, but within you are full of wrong and hypocrisy.

59 Luke 11:45 One of the scribes answered and said unto him, Teacher, in this saying of yours 60 you are casting a slur on us. Luke 11:46 He said, And to you also, you scribes, woe! For you lade men with heavy burdens, and you with one of your fingers come not near those burdens.

61 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets, which your fathers killed, and adorn the burying-places of the righteous, 62 and say, Matthew 23:30 If we had been in the days of our fathers, we should not have been partakers 63 with them in the blood of the prophets. Matthew 23:31 Wherefore, behold, you witness against 64 yourselves, that you are the children of those that slew the prophets. Matthew 23:32 And ye also, 65 ye fill up the measure of your fathers. Matthew 23:33 You serpents, you children of vipers, where shall you flee from the judgement of Gehenna?
