# Section 44

1, 2 Matthew 26:1 And when Jesus finished all these sayings, he said unto his disciples, Matthew 26:2 You know that after two days will be the passover, and the Son of man is delivered up to be 3 crucified. Matthew 26:3 Then gathered together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders 4 of the people, unto the court of the chief priest, who was called Caiaphas; Matthew 26:4 and they took counsel together concerning Jesus, that they might seize him by subtlety, and 5 kill him. Matthew 26:5 But they said, Not during the feast, lest there take place a disturbance among the people; Luke 22:2b for they feared the people.

6 Luke 22:3 And Satan entered into Judas who was called Iscariot, who was of the number 7 of the twelve. And he went away, and communed with the chief priests, and the scribes, and those that held command in the temple, and said unto them, What 8 [Arabic, p. 167] would ye pay me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they, when they heard *it*, were pleased, and made ready for him thirty *pieces* of money. 9 Luke 22:6 And he promised them, and from that time he sought an opportunity that he might deliver unto them Jesus without the multitude.

10 Mark 14:12 And on the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, and said unto him, Where will you that we go and make ready for you that you may eat the passover?

11 John 13:1 And before the feast of the passover, Jesus knew that the hour was arrived for his departure from this world unto his Father; and he loved his own in this world, 12 and to the last he loved them. John 13:2 And at the time of the feast, Satan put into the 13 heart of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, to deliver him up. John 13:3 And Jesus, because he knew that the Father had delivered into his hands everything, and that he came 14 forth from the Father, and goes unto God, John 13:4 rose from supper, and laid *aside* his 15 garments; John 13:5 and took a towel, *and* girded his waist, and poured water into a bason, and began to wash the feet of his disciples, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith 16 his waist was girded. John 13:6 And when he came to Simon Cephas, Simon said unto 17 him, Do you, my Lord, wash for me my feet? John 13:7 Jesus answered and said unto 18 him, What I do, now you know not; but afterwards you shall learn. John 13:8 Simon said unto him, You shall never wash for me my feet. Jesus said unto him, If I 19 wash you not, you have no part with me. John 13:9 Simon Cephas said unto him, Then, my 20 Lord, wash not for me my feet alone, but my hands also and my head. John 13:10 Jesus said unto him, He that bathes needs not to wash save his feet, whereas his whole 21 *body* is clean: and you also are clean, but not all of you. John 13:11 For Jesus knew him that should betray him; therefore said he, You are not all clean.

22 [Arabic, p. 168] John 13:12 So when he had washed their feet, he took his garments, and sat down, and 23 said unto them, Know ye what I have done unto you? John 13:13 You call me, Master, 24 and, Lord: and you say well; so I am. John 13:14 If then I, now, who am your Lord and Master, have washed for you your feet, how needful is it that you should wash one another's feet! 25 John 13:15 This have I given you as an example, that as I have done to you so ye should do 26 also. John 13:16 Verily, verily, I say unto you, No servant is greater than his lord; nor an 27 apostle greater than he that sent him. John 13:17 If you know that, you are happy if you do it. 28 John 13:18 My saying this is not for all of you: for I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture might be fulfilled, He that eats with me bread lifted against me his 29 heel. John 13:19 Henceforth I say unto you before it come to pass, that, when it comes to 30 pass, you may believe that I am *he*. John 13:20 Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever receives whomsoever I send receives me; and whosoever receives me receives him that sent me.

31 Luke 22:27 Who is the great *one*, he that sits, or he that serves? Is it not he that sits? 32 Luke 22:28 I am among you as he that serves. Luke 22:29 But you are they that have continued with me 33 in my temptations; Luke 22:30 I promise you, as my Father promised me, the kingdom, that you may eat and drink at the table of my kingdom.

34 Luke 22:7 And the first day came, the feast of unleavened bread, on which the Jews were 35 wont to sacrifice the passover. Luke 22:8 And Jesus sent two of his disciples, Cephas and John, and said unto them, Go and make ready for us the passover, that we may eat. 36, 37 Luke 22:9 And they said unto him, Where will you that we make ready for you? Luke 22:10a He said unto them, Go, enter the city; and at the time of your entering, there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water; Luke 22:11a follow him, and the place where he enters, say 38 to such an one, the master of the house, Matthew 26:18b Our Master says, My time has come, and [Arabic, p. 169] at your *house* I keep the passover. Luke 22:11b Where then is the lodging-place where 39 I shall eat with my disciples? Luke 22:12 And he will show you a large upper room 40 spread and made ready: Mark 14:15 there then make ready for us. Mark 14:16 And his two disciples went out, and came to the city, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover as he had said unto them.

41 Luke 22:14 And when the evening had come, and the time arrived, Jesus came and reclined, 42 and the twelve apostles with him. Luke 22:15 And he said unto them, With desire I have 43 desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer: Luke 22:16 I say unto you, that henceforth I shall not eat it, until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.

44 John 13:21a Jesus said that, and was agitated in his spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, 45 verily, I say unto you, One of you, *he* that eats with me, shall betray me. And they were very sorrowful; and they began to say unto him, one after another of 46 them, Can it be I, Lord? Mark 14:20 He answered and said unto them, One of the twelve, 47 he that dips his hand with me in the dish, will betray me. Luke 22:21 And lo, the hand of 48 him that betrays me is on the table. Mark 14:21 And the Son of man goes, as it is written of him: woe then to that man by whose hand the Son of man is betrayed! For it 49 would have been better for that man had he not been born. John 13:22 And the disciples 50 looked one on another, for they knew not to whom he referred; Luke 22:23 and they began to search among themselves, who that might be who was to do *this*.
