# Section 43

1 Luke 12:41 Simon Cephas said unto him, Our Lord, *is it* to us *that* you have spoken this 2 parable, or also to every man? Jesus said unto him, Who, do you think, is the servant, the master of the house, trusted with control, whom his lord set over his 3 household, to give them their food in its season? Matthew 24:46 Blessed is that servant, whom his 4 lord shall come and find having done so. Verily I say unto you, He will set him 5 over all that he has. But if that evil servant say in his heart, My lord delays his 6 coming; Matthew 24:49b and shall begin to beat his servants and the maidservants of his lord, and 7 shall begin to eat and to drink with the drunken; Matthew 24:50 the lord of that servant shall come 8 in the day that he thinks not, and in the hour that he knows not, Matthew 24:51a and shall [Arabic, p. 163] judge him, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites, Luke 12:46b and with those that are not faithful: Matthew 24:51b there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

9 Matthew 25:1 Then shall the kingdom of heaven be like ten virgins, those that took their 10 lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom and the bride. Matthew 25:2 Five of them were 11 wise, and five foolish. Matthew 25:3 And those foolish *ones* took their lamps, and took not with 12, 13 them oil: Matthew 25:4 but those wise *ones* took oil in vessels along with their lamps. Matthew 25:5 When then 14 the bridegroom delayed, they all slumbered and slept. Matthew 25:6 But in the middle of the night there occurred a cry, Behold, the bridegroom comes! Go forth therefore to 15, 16 meet him. Matthew 25:7 Then all those virgins arose, and made ready their lamps. Matthew 25:8 The foolish 17 said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out. Matthew 25:9 But those wise answered and said, Perhaps there will not be enough for us and you: but go ye to 18 the sellers, and buy for yourselves. Matthew 25:10 And when they went away to buy, the bridegroom came; and those that were ready went in with him to the marriage feast: and 19 the door was shut. Matthew 25:11 And at last those other virgins also came and said, Our Lord, 20 our Lord, open unto us. Matthew 25:12 He answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, 21 I know you not. Matthew 25:13 Watch then, for you know not that day nor that hour.

22 Matthew 25:14 *It is* as a man, who went on a journey, and called his servants, and delivered unto 23 them his possessions. Matthew 25:15 And unto one he gave five talents, and another two, and another 24 one; every one according to his strength; and went on *his* journey immediately. Matthew 25:16 He [Arabic, p. 164] then that received the five talents went and traded with them, and gained 26 other five. Matthew 25:17 And so also he of the two gained other two. Matthew 25:18 But he that received 27 the one went and dug in the earth, and hid the money of his lord. Matthew 25:19 And after a long time the lord of those servants came, and took from them the account. 28 Matthew 25:20 And he that received five talents came near and brought other five, and said, My lord, you gave me five talents: lo, I have gained other five in addition to them. 29 Matthew 25:21 His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant: over a little have 30 you been faithful, over much will I set you: enter into the joy of your lord. Matthew 25:22 And he that had the two came near and said, My lord, you gave me two talents: lo, 31 other two have I gained in addition to them. Matthew 25:23 His lord said unto him, Good, you faithful servant: over a little have you been faithful, over much will I set you: enter 32 into the joy of your lord. Matthew 25:24 And he also that received the one talent came forward and said, My lord, I knew you that you are a severe man, who reaps where you 33 sow not, and gathers where you did not scatter: Matthew 25:25 and so I was afraid, and 34 went away and hid your talent in the earth: lo, you have what is yours. Matthew 25:26 His lord answered and said unto him, You wicked and slothful servant, you knew me 35 that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I did not scatter; Matthew 25:27 it was incumbent on you to put my money to the bank, and *then* I should come and seek it with its 36 gains. Matthew 25:28 Take now from him the talent, and give it to him that has ten talents. 37 Matthew 25:29 Whosoever has shall be given, and he shall have more: but he that has not, even 38 [Arabic, p. 165] what he has shall be taken from him. Matthew 25:30 And the unprofitable servant, put him forth into the outer darkness: there shall be the weeping and gnashing of teeth.

39, 40 Luke 12:35 Your loins shall be girded, and your lamps lit; Luke 12:36 and you shall be like the people that are looking for their lord, when he shall return from the feast; so that, when 41 he comes and knocks, they may at once open unto him. Luke 12:37 Blessed are those servants, whom their lord shall come and find attentive: verily I say unto you, that he will gird his waist, and make them sit down, and pass through *them* and serve 42 them. Luke 12:38 And if he come in the second watch, or the third, and find thus, blessed are those servants.

43 Matthew 25:31 But when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all his pure angels with him, 44 then shall he sit on the throne of his glory: Matthew 25:32 and he will gather before him all the nations, and separate them the one from the other, like the shepherd who separates 45 the sheep from the goats; Matthew 25:33 and will set the sheep on his right, and the goats on his 46 left. Matthew 25:34 Then shall the King say to those that are at his right, Come, you blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world: 47 Matthew 25:35 I hungered, and you gave me to eat; and I thirsted, and you gave me to drink; and I 48 was a stranger, and you took me in; Matthew 25:36 and I was naked, and you clothed me; and I 49 was sick, and you visited me; and I was in prison, and you cared for me. Matthew 25:37 Then shall those righteous say unto him, Our Lord, when saw we you hungry, and fed you? 50 or thirsty, and gave you to drink? Matthew 25:38 And when saw we you a stranger, and took 51 you in? Or naked, and clothed you? Matthew 25:39 And when saw we you sick, or imprisoned, and 52 cared for you? Matthew 25:40 The King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, What 53 [Arabic, p. 166] ye did to one of these my brethren, the little ones, you did unto me. Matthew 25:41 Then shall he say unto those that are on his left also, Depart from me, you cursed, 54 into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his hosts: Matthew 25:42 I hungered, and you fed me 55 not; and I thirsted, and you did not give me to drink; Matthew 25:43 and I was a stranger, and you took me not in; and I was naked, and you clothed me not; and I was sick, and imprisoned, 56 and you visited me not. Matthew 25:44 Then shall those also answer and say, Our Lord, when saw we you an hungred, or thirsty, or naked, or a stranger, or sick, or imprisoned, 57 and did not minister unto you? Matthew 25:45 Then shall he answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, When ye did *it* not unto one of these little *ones*, you did *it* not 58 unto me also. Matthew 25:46 And these shall go away into eternal punishment: but the righteous into eternal life.
