# Section 42

1 Luke 21:20 But when you see Jerusalem with the army compassing it about, then know that 2 its desolation has come near. Luke 21:21 Those then that are in Judæa at that time shall flee to the mountain; and those that are within her shall flee; and those that are in the 3 villages shall not enter her. Luke 21:22 For these days are the days of vengeance, that all that 4 is written may be fulfilled. Matthew 24:15 And when you see the unclean sign of desolation, spoken of in Daniel the prophet, standing in the pure place, he that reads shall understand, 5, 6 Matthew 24:16 and then he that is in Judæa shall flee in to the mountain: Mark 13:15 and let him that is on the 7 roof not go down, nor enter in to take anything from his house: Mark 13:16 and let him that is in 8 [Arabic, p. 159] the field not turn behind him to take his garment. Luke 21:23 Woe to them that are with child and to them that give suck in those days! There shall be great 9 distress in the land, and wrath against this nation. Luke 21:24 And they shall fall on the edge of the sword, and shall be taken captive to every land: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the nations, until the times of the nations be ended.

10 Mark 13:21 Then if any man say unto you, The Messiah is here; or, Lo, he is there; believe 11 him not: Matthew 24:24 there shall rise then false Messiahs and prophets of lying, and shall do signs and wonders, in order that they may lead astray even the elect also, if they 12 be able. Mark 13:23 But as for you, beware: for I have acquainted you with everything 13 beforehand. Matthew 24:26 If then they say unto you, Lo, he is in the desert; go not out, lest ye 14 be taken: and if they say unto you, Lo, he is in the chamber; believe not. Matthew 24:27 And as the lightning appears from the east, and is seen unto the west; so shall be the 15 coming of the Son of man. Luke 17:25 But first he must suffer much and be rejected by this 16 generation. Matthew 24:20 Pray therefore that your flight be not in winter, nor on a sabbath: 17 Matthew 24:21 there shall be then great tribulation, the like of which there has not been from the 18 beginning of the world till now, nor shall be. Mark 13:20 And except the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh would have lived: but because of the elect, whom he elected, 19 he shortened those days. Luke 21:25 And there shall be signs in the sun and the moon and the stars; and upon the earth affliction of the nations, and rubbing of hands for the confusion 20 [Arabic, p. 160] of the noise of the sea, and an earthquake: Luke 21:26a the souls of men shall 21 go forth from fear of that which is to come upon the earth. And in those days, straightway after the distress of those days, the sun shall become dark, and the moon shall not show its light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers 22 of heaven shall be convulsed: Matthew 24:30 and then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and at that time all the tribes of the earth shall wail, and look unto the Son 23 of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and much glory. Matthew 24:31 And he shall send his angels with the great trumpet, and they shall gather his elect from the four 24 winds, from one end of heaven to the other. Luke 21:28 But when these things begin to be, be of good cheer, and lift up your heads; for your salvation has come near.

25 Matthew 24:32 Learn the example of the fig tree: when it lets down its branches, and puts 26 forth its leaves, you know that the summer has come; Matthew 24:33 so ye also, when you see these things begun to be, know ye that the kingdom of God has arrived at the 27 door. Matthew 24:34 Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, until all these 28 *things* shall be. Matthew 24:35 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my sayings shall not pass away.

29 Luke 21:34 Take heed to yourselves, that your hearts become not heavy with inordinate desire, and drunkenness, and the care of the world at any time, and that day come 30 upon you suddenly: Luke 21:35 for it is as a shock that shocks all the inhabitants that are on the 31 face of the whole earth. Luke 21:36 Watch at all times, and pray, that you may be worthy to escape [Arabic, p. 161] from all the things that are to be, and that you may stand before the Son of 32 man. Mark 13:32 Of that day and of that hour has no man learned, not even the angels 33 of heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. Mark 13:33 See ye, and watch and pray: for you know 34 not when that time *will be*. Mark 13:34 *It is* as a man, who journeyed, and left his house, and gave his authority to his servants, and appointed every man to his work, and 35 charged the porter to be wakeful. Mark 13:35 Be wakeful then: since you know not when the lord of the house comes, in the evening, or in the middle of the night, or when the 36 cock crows, or in the morning; Mark 13:36 lest he come unexpectedly, and find you sleeping. 37 Mark 13:37 The thing that I say unto you, unto all of you do I say it, Be watchful.

38 Matthew 24:37 For as it was in the days of Noah, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. 39 Matthew 24:38 As they were before the flood eating and drinking, and taking wives, and giving 40 wives to men, Matthew 24:39 until the day in which Noah entered into the ark, and they perceived not till the flood came, and took them all; so shall the coming of the Son of man 41 be. Luke 17:28 And as it was in the days of Lot; they were eating and drinking, and selling 42 and buying, and planting and building, Luke 17:29 on the day in which Lot went out from Sodom, and the Lord rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them 43, 44 all: Luke 17:30 so shall it be in the day in which the Son of man is revealed. Luke 17:31 And in that day, whosoever is on the roof, and his garments in the house, let him not go down to 45 take them: and he that is in the field shall not turn behind him. Luke 17:32 Remember Lot's 46 wife. Luke 17:33 Whosoever shall desire to save his life shall destroy it: but whosoever shall 47 destroy his life shall save it. Luke 17:34 Verily I say unto you, In that night there shall be two on 48 [Arabic, p. 162] one bed; one shall be taken, and another left. Luke 17:35 And two *women* shall be grinding 49 at one mill; one shall be taken, and another left. Luke 17:36 And two shall be in the 50 field; one shall be taken, and another left. Luke 17:37 They answered and said unto him, To what place, our Lord? He said unto them, Where the body is, there will the eagles 51, 52 gather. Matthew 24:42 Be attentive now: for you know not at what hour your Lord comes. Matthew 24:43 Know this: if the master of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have been attentive, and would not make it possible that his house should be 53 broken through. Matthew 24:44 Therefore be ye also ready: for in the hour that you think not the Son of man comes.
