# Section 47

1 John 16:16 A little *while*, and you shall not behold me; and a little *while* again, and you shall 2 behold me; because I go to the Father. John 16:17 His disciples therefore said one to another, What is this that he has said unto us, A little *while*, and you shall not behold me; and a little *while* again, and you shall behold me: and, I go to my 3 Father? John 16:18 And they said, What is this little *while* that he has said? We know not 4 what he speaks. John 16:19 And Jesus perceived that they were seeking to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye inquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said unto you, A little *while*, and you behold me not, and a little while again, and you shall 5 behold me? John 16:20 Verily, verily, I say unto you, that you shall weep and grieve, but the world shall rejoice: and you shall be sorrowful, but your grief shall turn to joy.

6 John 16:21 For, a woman when the time has come for her that she should bring forth, the arrival of the day of her bringing forth distresses her: but whenever she has brought forth a son, she remembers not her distress, for joy at the birth of a man into the 7 world. John 16:22 And ye now also grieve: but I shall see you, and your hearts shall rejoice, 8 [Arabic, p. 178] and your joy no man takes from you. John 16:23 And in that day you shall ask me nothing. And verily, verily, I say unto you, All that you ask my Father in my name, he will give you. John 16:24 Hitherto you have asked nothing 9 in my name: ask, and you shall receive, that your joy may be complete.

10 John 16:25 I have spoken unto you now in ænigmas: but there will come an hour when I shall not speak to you in ænigmas, but shall reveal unto you the Father plainly, 11 in that day when you shall ask in my name: John 16:26 and I say not unto you, that I shall 12 entreat the Father for you; John 16:27 for the Father loves you, because you have loved me, 13 and have believed that I came forth from my Father. John 16:28 I came forth from my Father, and came into the world: and I leave the world, and go unto my Father. 14 John 16:29 His disciples said unto him, Lo, your speech is now plain, and you have not said one 15 thing in an ænigma. John 16:30 Now, lo, we know that you know everything, and needest not that any man should ask you: and by this we believe that you came forth 16, 17 from God. John 16:31 Jesus said unto them, Believe that an hour comes, John 16:32 and lo, it has come, and you shall be scattered, every one of you to his place, and shall leave me 18 alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. John 16:33 This have I said unto you, that in me ye may have peace. And in the world trouble shall overtake you: but be of good courage; for I have overcome the world.

19 John 17:1 This said Jesus, and lifted up his eyes unto heaven, and said, My Father, the hour 20 has come; glorify your Son, that your Son may glorify you: John 17:2 as you gave him authority 21 over all flesh, that all that you have given him, he might give them eternal life. John 17:3 And this is eternal life, that they should know that you alone are true God, and *that he* 22 [Arabic, p. 179] whom you sent is Jesus the Messiah. John 17:4 I glorified you in the earth, 23 and the work which you gave me to do I have accomplished. John 17:5 And now glorify me, O Father, beside you, with that glory which I had with you 24 before the world was. John 17:6 I made known your name to the men whom you gave me out of the world: yours they were, and you gave them to me; and they have kept 25, 26 your word. John 17:7 Now they know that all that you have given me is from you: John 17:8 and the sayings which you gave me I have given unto them; and they received *them*, and knew of a truth that I came forth from you, and believed that you sent me. 27 John 17:9 And I ask for their sake: and my asking is not for the world, but for those whom 28 you have given me; for they are yours: John 17:10 and all that is mine is yours, and all that is 29 yours is mine: and I am glorified in them. John 17:11 And now I am not in the world, and they are in the world, and I come to you. My holy Father, keep them in your 30 name which you have given unto me, that they may be one, as we are. John 17:12 When I was with them in the world, I kept them in your name: and I kept those whom you gave unto me: and no man of them has perished, but the son of perdition; that 31 the scripture might be fulfilled. John 17:13 Now I come to you: and this I say in the world, 32 that my joy may be complete in them. John 17:14 I have given them your word; and the world 33 hated them, because they were not of the world, as I was not of the world. John 17:15 And I ask not this, that you take them from the world, but that you keep them from the 34, 35 evil one. John 17:16 They were not of the world, as I was not of the world. John 17:17 O Father, sanctify 36 them in your truth: for your word is truth. John 17:18 And as you sent me into the world, I 37 [Arabic, p. 180] also send them into the world. John 17:19 And for their sake I sanctify myself, that they 38 also may be sanctified in the truth. John 17:20 Neither for these alone do I ask, but for 39 the sake of them that believe in me through their word; John 17:21 that they may be all one; as you are in me, and I in you, and so they also shall be one in us: that the world 40 may believe that you sent me. John 17:22 And the glory which you have given unto 41 me I have given unto them; John 17:23 that they may be one, as we are one; I in them, and you in me, that they may be perfect into one; and *that* the world may know that 42 you sent me, and that I loved them, as you loved me. John 17:24 Father, and those whom you have given me, I wish that, where I am, they may be with me also; that they may behold my glory, which you have given me: for you loved me before 43 the foundation of the world. John 17:25 My righteous Father, and the world knew you not, 44 but I know you; and they knew that you sent me; and I made known unto them your name, and will make it known to them; John 17:26 that the love *wherewith* you loved me may be in them, and I shall be in them.
