# Section 50

1 Luke 23:4 And Pilate said unto the chief priests and the multitude, I have not found 2 against this man anything. Luke 23:5 But they cried out and said, He has disquieted our people with his teaching in all Judæa, and he began from Galilee and unto this 3 place. Luke 23:6 And Pilate, when he heard the name of Galilee, asked, Is this man a Galilæan? 4 Luke 23:7 And when he learned that he was under the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him to Herod: for he was in Jerusalem in those days.

5 Luke 23:8 And Herod, when he saw Jesus, rejoiced exceedingly: for he had desired to see him for a long time, because he had heard regarding him many things; and he counted on 6 [Arabic, p. 189] seeing some sign from him. Luke 23:9 And he questioned him with many words; but 7 Jesus answered him not a word. Luke 23:10 And the scribes and chief priests were 8 standing *by*, and they accused him vehemently. Luke 23:11 And Herod scoffed at him, he and his servants; and when he had scoffed at him, he clothed him in robes of scarlet, 9 and sent him to Pilate. Luke 23:12 And on that day Pilate and Herod became friends, there having been enmity between them before that.

10, 11 Luke 23:13 And Pilate called the chief priests and the rulers of the people, Luke 23:14 and said unto them, You brought unto me this man, as the perverter of your people: and I have tried him before you, and have not found in this man any cause of all that you 12 seek against him: Luke 23:15 nor yet Herod: for I sent him unto him; and he has done 13 nothing for which he should deserve death. Luke 23:16 So now I will chastise him, and let 14, 15 him go. Luke 23:18a The multitude all cried out and said, Take him from us, take him. Mark 15:3a And 16 the chief priests and the elders accused him of many things. Matthew 27:12 And during their 17 accusation he answered not a word. Matthew 27:13 Then Pilate said unto him, Do you not hear 18 how many *things* they witness against you? Matthew 27:14 And he answered him not, not even one word: and Pilate marvelled at that.

19 Matthew 27:19 And when the judge sat on his tribune, his wife sent unto him, and said unto him, See that you have nothing to do with that righteous *man*: for I have suffered much in my dream today because of him.

20 Matthew 27:15 And at every feast the custom of the judge was to release to the people one 21 prisoner, him whom they would. Matthew 27:16 And there was in their prison a well-known prisoner, 22, 23 called Barabbas. Matthew 27:17a And when they assembled, Pilate said unto them, John 18:39 You have a custom, that I should release unto you a prisoner at the passover: will you that I 24 release unto you the King of the Jews? John 18:40 And they all cried out and said, Release not [Arabic, p. 190] unto us this *man*, but release unto us Barabbas. And this Barabbas was a 25 robber, Luke 23:19 who for sedition and murder, which was in the city, was cast into the 26 prison. Mark 15:8 And all the people cried out and began to ask *him to do* as the custom was 27 that he should do with them. And Pilate answered and said unto them, Whom will you that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called the Messiah, the 28 King of the Jews? Matthew 27:18 For Pilate knew that envy had moved them to deliver him up. 29 Matthew 27:20 And the chief priests and the elders asked the multitudes to deliver Barabbas, and 30 to destroy Jesus. Matthew 27:21 The judge answered and said unto them, Whom of the two will 31 ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas. Matthew 27:22a Pilate said unto them, And 32 Jesus which is called the Messiah, what shall I do with him? Mark 15:13 They all cried out 33 and said, Crucify him. Luke 23:20 And Pilate spoke to them again, for he desired to release 34 Jesus; Luke 23:21 but they cried out and said, Crucify him, crucify him, and release unto us 35 Barabbas. Luke 23:22 And Pilate said unto them a third time, What evil has this *man* done? I have not found in him any cause to necessitate death: I will chastise him and 36 let him go. Luke 23:23 But they increased in importunity with a loud voice, and asked him to crucify him. And their voice, and the voice of the chief priests, prevailed. 37 Then Pilate released unto them that one who was cast into prison for sedition and murder, Barabbas, whom they asked for: Matthew 27:26b and he scourged Jesus with whips.

38 Matthew 27:27 Then the footsoldiers of the judge took Jesus, and went into the prætorium, and 39 [Arabic, p. 191] gathered unto him all of the footsoldiers. Matthew 27:28 And they stripped him, and put on 40 him a scarlet cloak. John 19:2 And they clothed him in garments of purple, and plaited 41 a crown of thorns, and placed it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; Matthew 27:29b and while they mocked at him and laughed, they fell down on their knees before him, and bowed 42 down to him, and said, Hail, King of the Jews! Matthew 27:30 And they spat in his face, and took the reed from his hand, and struck him on his head, John 19:3b and smote his cheeks. 43 John 19:4 And Pilate went forth without again, and said unto the Jews, I bring him forth to 44 you, that you may know that I do not find, in examining him, even one crime. John 19:5 And Jesus went forth without, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple garments. 45 John 19:6 Pilate said unto them, Behold, the man! And when the chief priests and the soldiers saw him, they cried out and said, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate said unto them, Take him yourselves, and crucify him: for I find not a cause against 46 him. John 19:7 The Jews said unto him, We have a law, and according to our law he deserves 47 death, because he made himself the Son of God. John 19:8 And when Pilate heard this word, 48 his fear increased; John 19:9 and he entered again into the porch, and said to Jesus, Whence 49 are you? John 19:10 But Jesus answered him not a word. Pilate said unto him, Do you not speak unto me? Do you not know that I have authority to release you, and have 50 authority to crucify you? John 19:11 Jesus said unto him, You have not any authority over me, if you were not given *it* from above: therefore the sin of him that delivered 51 me up unto you is greater than your sin. John 19:12 And for this word Pilate wished to release him: but the Jews cried out, If you let him go, you are not a friend of Cæsar: for every one that makes himself a king is against Cæsar.
