# Section 53

1 Luke 24:4 And while they marvelled at that, behold, two men standing above them, their 2 raiment shining: Luke 24:5 and they were seized with fright, and bowed down their face to 3 the earth: and they said unto them, Why do you seek the living *one* with the dead? Luke 24:6 He is not here; he is risen: remember what he was speaking unto you while he was in 4 Galilee, and saying, Luke 24:7 The Son of man is to be delivered up into the hands of sinners, 5 and to be crucified, and on the third day to rise. Matthew 28:7a But go in haste, and say to his disciples and to Cephas, He is risen from among the dead; and lo, he goes before 6 you into Galilee; and there you shall see him, where he said unto you: lo, I have 7 told you. And they remembered his sayings; and they departed in haste from the 8 tomb with joy and great fear, and hastened and went; Mark 16:8b and perplexity and fear 9 encompassed them; and they told no man anything, for they were afraid. John 20:2 And Mary hastened, and came to Simon Cephas, and to that other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said unto them, They have taken our Lord from the sepulchre, and I 10 know not where they have laid him. John 20:3 And Simon went out, and that other disciple, 11 and came to the sepulchre. John 20:4 And they hastened both together: and that disciple 12 outran Simon, and came first to the sepulchre; John 20:5 and he looked down, and saw the 13 linen laid; but he went not in. John 20:6 And Simon came after him, and entered into the 14 [Arabic, p. 201] sepulchre, and saw the linen laid; John 20:7 and the scarf with which his head was bound was not with the linen, but wrapped and laid aside in a certain place. 15 John 20:8 Then entered that disciple which came first to the sepulchre, and saw, and believed. 16 John 20:9 And they knew not yet from the scriptures that the Messiah was to rise from among 17 the dead. John 20:10 And those two disciples went to their place.

18 John 20:11 But Mary remained at the tomb weeping: and while she wept, she looked 19 down into the tomb; John 20:12 and she saw two angels sitting in white raiment, one of them toward his pillow, and the other toward his feet, where the body of Jesus had been 20 laid. John 20:13 And they said unto her, Woman, why do you weep? She said unto them, 21 They have taken my Lord, and I know not where they have left him. John 20:14 She said that, and turned behind her, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was 22 Jesus. John 20:15 Jesus said unto her, Woman, why do you weep? Whom do you seek? And she supposed him *to be* the gardener, and said, My lord, if you have taken him, 23 tell me where you have laid him, that I may go and take him. John 20:16 Jesus said unto her, Mary. She turned, and said unto him in Hebrew, Rabboni; which is, being 24 interpreted, Teacher. John 20:17 Jesus said unto her, Touch me not; for I have not ascended yet unto my Father: go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and my God and your God.

25 Mark 16:9 And on the First-day on which he rose, he appeared first unto Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons.

26 Matthew 28:11b And some of those guards came to the city, and informed the chief priests of 27 [Arabic, p. 202] all that had happened. Matthew 28:12 And they assembled with the elders, and took 28 counsel; Matthew 28:13 and they gave money, not a little, to the guards, and said unto them, Say ye, His disciples came and stole him by night, while we were sleeping.

29 Matthew 28:14 And if the judge hear that, we will make a plea with him, and free you of blame. 30 Matthew 28:15 And they, when they took the money, did according to what they taught them. And this word spread among the Jews unto this day.

31 John 20:18 And then came Mary Magdalene, and announced to the disciples that she had seen our Lord, and that he had said that unto her.

32 Matthew 28:8b And while the first women were going in the way to inform his disciples, 33 Jesus met them, and said unto them, Peace unto you. Matthew 28:9 And they came and took 34 hold of his feet, and worshipped him. Matthew 28:10 Then said Jesus unto them, Fear not: but go and say to my brethren that they depart into Galilee, and there they shall see 35 me. Luke 24:9 And those women returned, and told all that to the eleven, and to the rest of the disciples; Mark 16:10b and to those that had been with him, for they were saddened and 36 weeping. Luke 24:10 And those were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and the rest who were with them: and they were those that told the apostles. 37 Mark 16:11 And they, when they heard them say that he was alive and had appeared unto them, 38 did not believe them: Luke 24:11a and these sayings were before their eyes as the sayings of madness. 39 [Arabic, p. 203] And after that, he appeared to two of them, on that day, and while they were going to the village which was named Emmaus, and whose distance 40 from Jerusalem was sixty furlongs. Luke 24:14 And they were talking the one of them with the 41 other of all the things which had happened. Luke 24:15 And during the time of their talking and 42 inquiring with one another, Jesus came and reached them, and walked with them. Luke 24:16 But 43 their eyes were veiled that they should not know him. Luke 24:17 And he said unto them, What are these sayings which you address the one of you to the other, as you walk and are 44 sad? Luke 24:18 One of them, whose name was Cleopas, answered and said unto him, Are you perchance alone a stranger to Jerusalem, since you know not what was in 45 it in these days? He said unto them, What was? Luke 24:19 They said unto him, Concerning Jesus, he who was from Nazareth, a man who was a prophet, and powerful in 46 speech and deeds before God and before all the people: Luke 24:20 and the chief priests and 47 the elders delivered him up to the sentence of death, and crucified him. Luke 24:21 But we supposed that he was the one who was to deliver Israel. And since all these 48 things happened there have passed three days. Luke 24:22 But *certain* women of us also 49 informed us that they had come to the sepulchre; Luke 24:23 and when they found not his body, they came and told us that they had seen there the angels, and they said 50 concerning him that he was alive. Luke 24:24 And some of us also went to the sepulchre, and 51 found the matter as the women had said: only they saw him not. Luke 24:25 Then said Jesus 52 unto them, You lacking in discernment, and heavy in heart to believe! Luke 24:26 Was it not in all the sayings of the prophets that the Messiah was to suffer these things, and to 53 [Arabic, p. 204] enter into his Glory? Luke 24:27 And he began from Moses and from all the prophets, 54 and interpreted to them concerning himself from all the scriptures. Luke 24:28 And they drew near unto the village, whither they were going: and he was leading them to 55 imagine that he was as if going to a distant region. Luke 24:29 And they pressed him, and said unto him, Abide with us: for the day has declined now to the darkness. And he went 56 in to abide with them. Luke 24:30 And when he sat with them, he took bread, and blessed, 57 and broke, and gave to them. Luke 24:31 And straightway their eyes were opened, and they 58 knew him; and he was taken away from them. Luke 24:32 And they said the one to the other, Was not our heart heavy within us, while he was speaking to us in the way, and interpreting to us the scriptures?

59 Luke 24:33 And they rose in that hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven 60 gathered, and those that were with them, saying, Luke 24:34 Truly our Lord is risen, and has 61 appeared to Simon. Luke 24:35 And they related what happened in the way, and how they knew him when he broke the bread. Mark 16:13 Neither believed they that also.
