# Chapter 9 — The attacks brought against religious on account of their works of charity

***Objections***

As religious are charged with meddling in other people’s concerns, we will now consider the grounds on which these accusations are based.  

Obj. 1: The following words of St. Paul are quoted: *aspire to live quietly and to mind your own affairs* (1 Thess 4:11). They also cite the commentary of the Gloss, *leaving the affairs of other people alone, as is profitable for the amendment of your own life*. *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at 1 Thess 4:11 (PL 192:300C).)*  

Obj. 2: St. Paul says, *we hear that some of you are living in idleness, mere busybodies, not doing any work* (2 Thess 3:11). On this passage the Gloss remarks, *do men who act thus, contrary to the law of the Lord, deserve to be supported by the alms of others?* *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at 2 Thess 3:11 (PL 192:325B).)*  

Obj. 3: *No soldier on service to God gets entangled in civilian pursuits* (2 Tim 2:4), *of any kind whatsoever*, adds the Gloss. *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at 2 Tim 2:4 (PL 192:367D).)* But the affairs of other people are frequently of a worldly nature.  

And thus it is maintained that religious ought never to concern themselves with the business of their neighbours.  

Response  

I answer that, this opinion is directly opposed to the teaching of St. James, who says: *religion that is pure and undefiled before God and the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction* (Jas 1:27), that is, *to help those who are in distress and have no other assistance*, as the Gloss explains. *(*Glossa interlinearis*, at Jas 1:27 (in *Glossa ordinaria* 6, 1273-74).)*  

Again, *I commend to you our sister Phoebe* (Rom 16:1). The Gloss says that the Apostle here speaks of a woman who had gone to Rome on some business. *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at Rom 16:1 (PL 191:1527D).)* He commends her to the care of the Romans: *help her in whatever she may require from you*. *(Rom 16:2.)*  

Again, *bear one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ* (Gal 6:2).  

These words, all prove that it is commendable in a man to be as anxious about his neighbour’s interests as if they were his own.  

Replies to objections  

Ad 1-2: Nevertheless, two faults are nevertheless to be avoided in the exercise of this fraternal charity.  

We must beware of being so occupied about other people’s affairs as to neglect our own. St. Paul warns us against this error, saying: *aspire to live quietly*, that is, *free from curiosity* (Gloss); *and to mind your own affairs* (1 Thess 4:11), *leaving other people’s alone* (Gloss). *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at 1 Thess 4:11 (PL 192:300C).)* We are here commanded to mind our own concerns, rather than those of our neighbours.  

St. Paul also warns us against helping others in any illicit proceedings, or assisting them from an unlawful motive. Hence the Gloss says on the words *mere busybodie*s (2 Thess 3:11): *do men who thus act contrary to the law of the Lord deserve to be supported by the alms of others? For their God is their belly, and with unworthy solicitude they seek to provide themselves with the necessities of life*. *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at 2 Thess 3:11 (PL 192:325B).)* Their iniquitous motive is proved by the fact that they desire only their own material advantage. That they seek, with reprehensible anxiety, to procure such advantage proves that they are engaged in some unlawful business. This is our answer to the two first accusations brought against religious who assist their neighbour.  

**Ad 3**: To the third charge we answer that according to the explanation of the Gloss, those occupations are to be called secular, in which men are engaged in making money, but not by manual labor. *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at 2 Tim 2:4 (PL 192:368A).)* To this class belong all mercantile pursuits. Religious are forbidden to involve themselves in any business of this description. They may not, for instance, trade in another man’s interest. There is no reason, however, against their performing charitable offices for their neighbours, such as giving him advice, or interceding for him.
