# Chapter 21 — The enemies of religious spread abroad against them reports of which the truth is doubtful

We will next consider how the enemies of religious propagate against them accusations, of which the truth is doubtful.  

Doubt exists about future events, and also about the workings of a man’s heart. Nevertheless, the enemies of the religious life do not hesitate to assert that religious will eventually become both immoral and unbelieving. *(William of Saint-Amoure, *De periculis*, 4, 7.)* They also profess to be able to read the hearts of religious, and accuse them of desiring popularity, *(William of Saint-Amoure, *De periculis*, 14, sign. 25; *Collectiones*, 4, sign. 22.)* of seeking their own glory instead of the glory of God, *(William of Saint-Amoure, *De periculis*, 14, sign. 31; *Sermo 'Qui amat periculum'*; *Collectiones* 4, sign. 9.)* and of many other things of like nature. Such accusations convict their authors of rash judgment. *Let us no more pass judgment on one another*, says St. Paul (Rom 14:13). The Gloss hereon observes: *we judge rashly, if we pass sentence on the secret things of another man’s heart, or if we foretell what a man, who now seems either good or bad, will be in the future*. *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at Rom 14:13 (PL 191:1516B).)* Such judgments proceed either from pride or envy; and the authors of them prefer rather to blame and to backbite other men, than to correct or improve them.  

They likewise lay claim to the power of Almighty God, to whom alone it belongs to read the future and the secrets of man’s heart. Isaiah 41:23 says, *tell us what is to come hereafter, that we may know that you are gods*. Jeremiah 17:9 likewise says: *the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately corrupt; who can understand it? I the Lord search the mind and try the heart*. St. Paul writes, *therefore, do not pronounce judgment before the time* (1 Cor 4:5). The Gloss remarks on these words: *it is an insult to the judge, if his slave presume to anticipate him in pronouncing sentence*. *(Peter Lombard, *Commentaries on the Psalms and St. Paul*, at 1 Cor 4:5 (PL 191:1565D).)* These words apply to those who pass judgment on causes which the Lord reserves to himself.
