# Lecture 6 — LESSON 6 — On Speech, the Formal Principle of the Enunciation — Λόγος δέ ἐστι φωνὴ σημαντική, ἧς τῶν μερῶν τι σημαντικόν ἐστι κεχωρισμένον, ὡς φάσις ἀλλ' οὐχ ὡς κατάφασις. — 16b 26 Speech” is significant vocal sound, some parts of which are significant separately, i.e., as words but not as an affirmation. — λέγω δέ, οἷον ἄνθρωπος σημαίνει τι, ἀλλ' οὐχ ὅτι ἔστιν ἢ οὐκ ἔστιν (ἀλλ' ἔσται κατάφασις ἢ ἀπόφασις ἐάν τι προστεθῇ) — 16b 28 Let me explain. The word “animal” signifies something, but it does not signify that it is or that it is not; it will be an affirmation or negation, however, if something is added. — ἀλλ' οὐχ ἡ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου συλλαβὴ μία οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐν τῷ μῦς τὸ υς σημαντικόν, ἀλλὰ φωνή ἐστι νῦν μόνον. ἐν δὲ τοῖς διπλοῖς σημαίνει μέν, ἀλλ' οὐ καθ' αὑτό, ὥσπερ εἴρηται. — 16b 30 But one syllable of “animal” does not signify anything; similarly, in the word “fowl,” “owl” does not signify anything in itself, but is only a vocal sound. In composite names, however, the part does signify something, but not in itself, as has been said. — ἔστι δὲ λόγος ἅπας μὲν (17a.) σημαντικός, οὐχ ὡς ὄργανον δέ, ἀλλ' ὥσπερ εἴρηται κατὰ συνθήκην — 16b 34 But all speech [i.e., words put together to express thought] is significant—not just as an instrument, however, but by convention, as has been said.

16b 26 Speech” is significant vocal sound, some parts of which are significant separately, i.e., as words but not as an affirmation.

16b 28 Let me explain. The word “animal” signifies something, but it does not signify that it is or that it is not; it will be an affirmation or negation, however, if something is added.

16b 30 But one syllable of “animal” does not signify anything; similarly, in the word “fowl,” “owl” does not signify anything in itself, but is only a vocal sound. In composite names, however, the part does signify something, but not in itself, as has been said.

16b 34 But all speech [i.e., words put together to express thought] is significant—not just as an instrument, however, but by convention, as has been said.

1. Having established and explained the definition of the name and the verb, which are the material principles of the enunciation inasmuch as they are its parts, the Philosopher now determines and explains what speech is, which is the formal principle of the enunciation inasmuch as it is its genus. First he proposes the definition of speech; then he explains it where he says, *Let me explain. The word “animal” signifies something*, etc.; finally, he excludes an error where he says, *But all speech is significant—not just as an instrument*, however, etc.

2. In defining speech the Philosopher first states what it has in common with the name and verb where he says, *Speech is significant vocal sound*. This was posited in the definition of the name but not repeated in the case of the verb, because it was supposed from the definition of the name. This was done for the sake of brevity and to avoid repetition; but subsequently he did prove that the verb signifies something. He repeats this, however, in the definition of speech because the signification of speech differs from that of the name and the verb; for the name and the verb signify simple thought, whereas speech signifies composite thought.

3. Secondly, he posits what differentiates speech from the name and verb when he says, *of which some of the parts are significant separately*; for a part of a name taken separately does not signify anything per se, except in the case of a name composed of two parts, as he said above. Note that he says, *of which some of the parts are significant*, and not, *a part of which is significant separately*; this is to exclude negations and the other words used to unite categorical words, which do not in themselves signify something absolutely, but only the relationship of one thing to another. Then because the signification of vocal sound is twofold, one being referred to composite thought, the other to simple thought (the first belonging to speech, the second, not to speech but to a part of speech), he adds, as words but not as an affirmation. What he means is that a part of speech signifies in the way a word signifies, a name or a verb, for instance; it does not signify in the way an affirmation signifies, which is composed of a name and a verb. He only mentions affirmation because negation adds something to affirmation as far as vocal sound is concerned for if a part of speech, since it is simple, does not signify as an affirmation, it will not signify as a negation.

4. Aspasius objects to this definition because it does not seem to belong to all parts of speech. There is a kind of speech he says, in which some of the parts signify as an affirmation; for instance, “If the sun shines over the earth, it is day,” and so in many other examples.

Porphyry says in reply to this objection that in whatever genus there is something prior and posterior, it is the prior thing that has to be defined. For example, when we give the definition of a species—say, of man—the definition is understood of that which is *in act*, not of that which is *in potency*. Since, then, in the genus of speech, simple speech is prior, Aristotle defines it first.

Or, we can answer the objection in the way Alexander and Ammonius do. They say that speech is defined here commonly. Hence what is common to simple and composite speech ought to be stated in the definition. Now to have parts signifying something as an affirmation belongs only to composite speech, but to have parts signifying something in the mode of a word and not in the mode of an affirmation is common to simple and composite speech. Therefore this had to be posited in the definition of speech. We should not conclude, however, that it is of the nature of speech that its part not be an affirmation, but rather that it is of the nature of speech that its parts be something that signify in the manner of words and not in the manner of an affirmation.

Porphyry’s solution reduces to the same thing as far as meaning is concerned, although it is a little different verbally. Aristotle frequently uses “to say” for “to affirm,” and hence to prevent “word” from being taken as “affirmation” when he says that a part of speech signifies as a word, he immediately adds, *not as an affirmation*, meaning—according to Porphyry’s view—“word” is not taken here in the sense in which it is the same as “affirmation.”

A philosopher called John the Grammarian thought that this definition could only apply to perfect speech because there only seem to be parts in the case of something perfect, or complete; for example, a house to which all of the parts are referred. Therefore only perfect speech has significant parts.

He was in error on this point, however, for while it is true that all the parts are referred principally to the perfect, or complete whole, some parts are referred to it immediately, for example, the walls and roof to a house and organic members to an animal; others, however, are referred to it through the principal parts of which they are parts; stones, for example, to the house by the mediate wall, and nerves and bones to the animal by the mediate organic members like the hand and the foot, etc. In the case of speech, therefore, all of the parts are principally referred to perfect speech, a part of which is imperfect speech, which also has significant parts. Hence this definition belongs both to perfect and to imperfect speech.

5. When he says, *Let me explain. The word “animal” signifies something*, etc., he elucidates the definition. First he shows that what he says is true; secondly, he excludes a false understanding of it where he says, But one syllable of “animal” does not signify anything, etc.

He explains that when he says *some parts* of speech are significant, he means that some of the parts signify something in the way the name “animal,” which is a part of speech, signifies something and yet does not signify as an affirmation or negation, because it does not signify *to be* or *not to be*. By this I mean it does not signify affirmation or negation in act, but only in potency; for it is possible to add something that will make it an affirmation or negation, i.e., a verb.

6. He excludes a false understanding of what has been said by his next statement. *But one syllable of “animal” does not signify anything*. This could be referred to what has just been said and the meaning would be that the name will be an affirmation or negation if something is added to it, but not if what is added is one syllable of a name. However, what he says next is not compatible with this meaning and therefore these words should be referred to what was stated earlier in defining speech, namely, to some parts of which are significant separately. Now, since what is properly called a part of a whole is that which contributes immediately to the formation of the whole, and not that which is a part of a part, “some parts” should be understood as the parts from which speech is immediately formed, i.e., the name and verb, and not as parts of the name or verb, which are syllables or letters. Hence, what is being said here is that a part of speech is significant separately but not such a part as the syllable of a name.

He manifests this by means of syllables that sometimes can be words signifying per se. “Owl,” for example, is sometimes one word signifying per se. When taken as a syllable of the name “fowl,” however, it does not signify something per se but is only a vocal sound. For a word is composed of many vocal sounds, but it has simplicity in signifying insofar as it signifies simple thought. Hence, a word inasmuch as it is a composite vocal sound can have a part which is a vocal sound, but inasmuch as it is simple in signifying it cannot have a signifying part. Whence syllables are indeed vocal sounds, but they are not vocal sounds signifying per se.

In contrast to this it should be noted that in composite names, which are imposed to signify a simple thing from some composite understanding, the parts appear to signify something, although according to truth they do not. For this reason he adds that in compound words, i.e., composite names, the syllables may be words contributing to the composition of a name, and therefore signify something, namely, in the composite, and according as they are words; but as parts of this kind of name they do not signify something per se, but in the way that has already been explained.

7. Then he says, *But all speech is significant—not just as an instrument, however*, etc. Here he excludes the error of those who said that speech and its parts signify naturally rather than by convention. To prove their point they used the following argument. The instruments of a natural power must themselves be natural, for nature does not fail in regard to what is necessary; but the interpretive power is natural to man; therefore, its instruments are natural. Now the instrument of the interpretive power is speech since it is through speech that expression is given to the conception of the mind; for we mean by an instrument that by which an agent operates. Therefore, speech is something natural, signifying, not from human institution, but naturally.

8. Aristotle refutes this argument, which is said to be that of Plato in the *Cratylus*, when he says that all speech is significant, but not as an instrument of a power, that is, of a natural power; for the natural instruments of the interpretive power are the throat and lungs, by which vocal sound is formed, and the tongue, teeth and lips by which letters and articulate sounds are formulated. Rather, speech and its parts are effects of the interpretative power through the aforesaid instruments. For just as the motive power uses natural instruments such as arms and hands to make an artificial work, so the interpretative power uses the throat and other natural instruments to make speech. Hence, speech and its parts are not natural things, but certain artificial effects. This is the reason Aristotle adds here that speech signifies by convention, i.e., according to the ordinance of human will and reason.

It should be noted, however, that if we do not attribute the interpretative power to a motive power, but to reason, then it is not a natural power but is beyond every corporeal nature, since thought is not an act of the body, as is proved in III *De anima* [4: 429a 10]. Moreover, it is reason itself that moves the corporeal motive power to make artificial works, which reason then uses as instruments; and thus artificial works are not instruments of a corporeal power. Reason can also use speech and its parts in this way, i.e., as instruments, although they do not signify naturally.
