# Lecture 3 — The diverse signification of vocal sound

16a9. As sometimes there is thought in the soul without its being true or false, but sometimes it must be one or the other, so it is in vocal sound.  

> 16a12. For in composition and division there is truth and falsity.

> 16a13. Names and verbs, then, are like thought without composition or division (for example, “man” and “white” when nothing is added); for neither is yet true or false.

> 16a16. A sign of this is that “goat-stag” signifies something, but is neither true nor false unless “to be” or “not to be” is added either absolutely or according to time.

> ***As sometimes there is thought***. After the Philosopher has treated the order of the signification of vocal sounds, he goes on to discuss a diversity in the signification of vocal sounds—that is, some of them signify the true or the false, others do not.

And he does two things about this:  

first, he first states the difference;  

second, he makes it clear, at: ***for in composition and division there is truth and falsity*** (16a12; [25]).  

Now, because in the order of nature, conceptions of the intellect precede vocal sounds, which are uttered to express them, he assigns the difference in respect to the significations of vocal sounds from a likeness to the difference in intellection. Thus the manifestation is from a likeness and at the same time from the cause which the effects imitate.  

The operation of the intellect is twofold, as was said in the beginning, and as is explained in *On the Soul* 3.6, 430a26. Now, truth and falsity is found in one of these operations but not in the other. This is what Aristotle says at the beginning of this portion of the text, that is, that ***in the soul sometimes*** there is ***thought without truth and falsity, but sometimes*** of necessity it has ***one or the other*** of these. And since significant vocal sounds are formed to express these conceptions of the intellect, it is necessary that some significant vocal sounds signify without truth and falsity, others with truth and falsity—in order that the sign be conformed to what is signified.  

Then, when he says: ***for in composition and division there is truth and falsity*** (16a12), he manifests what he has just said:  

first, with respect to what he has said about thought;  

second, with respect to what he has said about the likeness of vocal sounds to thought, where he says: ***names** **and verbs, then, are like thought*** (16a13; [33]).  

To show that sometimes there is thought without truth or falsity, and sometimes it is accompanied by one of these, he says first that ***truth*** and ***falsity concern composition*** ***and division*** (16a12).  

To understand this we must note again that one of the two operations of the intellect is the understanding of what is indivisible. The intellect does this when it understands the quiddity or essence of a thing absolutely (for instance, what man is or what white is or what something else of this kind is).  

The other operation is the one in which it composes and divides simple concepts of this kind. He says that in this second operation of the intellect—that is, composing and dividing—truth and falsity is found, with the conclusion that it is not found in the first, as he also says in *On the Soul* 3.6, 430a26.  

There seems to be a difficulty about this point, for division is made by resolution to what is indivisible, or simple, and therefore it seems that just as truth and falsity is not in simple things, so neither is it in division.  

To answer this it should be pointed out that the conceptions of the intellect are likenesses of things, and therefore the things that are in the intellect can be considered and named in two ways:  

in one way, according to themselves;  

in a second way, according to the nature of the things of which they are the likenesses.  

For just as a statue—say of Hercules—in itself is called and is bronze, but insofar it is a likeness of Hercules is called a man, so if we consider the things that are in the intellect in themselves, there is always composition where there is truth and falsity, for they are never found in the intellect except as it compares one simple concept with another.  

But if the composition is referred to reality, it is sometimes called composition, sometimes division: composition when the intellect compares one concept to another as though apprehending a conjunction or identity of the things of which they are conceptions; division when it so compares one concept with another that it apprehends the things to be diverse. In vocal sound, therefore, affirmation is called composition inasmuch as it signifies a conjunction on the part of the thing, and negation is called division inasmuch as it signifies the separation of things.  

There is still another objection in relation to this point. It seems that truth is not in composition and division alone.  

First, because a thing is also said to be true or false, as gold is said to be true gold or false gold. Also, being and true are said to be convertible. It seems, therefore, that the simple conception of the intellect, which is a likeness of the thing, also has truth and falsity.  

Again, the Philosopher says in his book *On the Soul*, *(*On the Soul* bk. 2, ch. 6, 418a15.)* that the sensation of proper sensibles is always true. But the sense does not compose or divide. Therefore, truth is not in composition and division exclusively.  

Moreover, in the divine intellect there is no composition, as is proved in *Metaphysics* 9.9, 1074b15–1075a11. But the first and highest truth is in the divine intellect. Therefore, truth is not in composition and division exclusively.  

To answer these difficulties the following considerations are necessary.  

Truth is found in something in two ways:  

as it is in that which is true,  

and as it is in the one speaking or knowing truth.  

Truth as it is in that which is true is found in both simple things and composite things, but truth in the one speaking or knowing truth is found only according to composition and division. This will become clear in what follows.  

Truth, as the Philosopher says in *Ethics* 6.2, 1139a28–30, is the good of the intellect. Hence, anything that is said to be true is such by reference to intellect.  

[Now, vocal sounds are related to thought as signs, but things are related to thought as that of which thoughts are likenesses.]  

It must be noted, however, that a thing is related to thought in two ways.  

In one way, as the measure is related to the measured, and this is the way natural things are related to the human speculative intellect. Thus thought is said to be true insofar as it is conformed to the thing, but false insofar as it is not in conformity with the thing. However, a natural thing is not said to be true in relation to our thought in the way it was taught by certain ancient natural philosophers who supposed the truth of things to be only in what they seemed to be. According to this view, it would follow that contradictories could be at once true, since the opinions of different men can be contradictory. Nevertheless, some things are said to be true or false in relation to our thought—not essentially or formally, but effectively—insofar as they are so constituted naturally as to cause a true or false estimation of themselves. It is in this way that gold is said to be true or false.  

In another way, things are compared to thought as measured to the measure, as is evident in the practical intellect, which is a cause of things. In this way, the work of an artisan is said to be true insofar as it achieves the conception in the mind of the artist, and false insofar as it falls short of that conception.  

Now, all natural things are related to the divine intellect as artifacts to art, and therefore a thing is said to be true insofar as it has its own form according to which it represents divine art. False gold, for example, is true copper. It is in terms of this that being and true are converted, since any natural thing is conformed to divine art through its form. For this reason, the Philosopher says *(*Physics* bk. 1, ch. 9, 192a17.)* that form is something divine.  

And just as a thing is said to be true by comparison to its measure, so also is sensation or thought, whose measure is the thing outside of the soul. Accordingly, sensation is said to be true when the sense is in conformity with the thing existing outside of the a soul through its form. It is in this way that the sensation of proper sensibles is true, and the intellect apprehending what a thing is (apart from composition and division) is always true, as is said in *On the Soul*. *(*On the Soul*, bk. 3, ch. 3, 427b12; bk. 3, ch. 3, 428a11; bk. 3, ch. 6, 43a26.)*  

It should be noted, however, that although the sensation of the proper object is true, the sense does not perceive the sensation to be true, for it cannot know its relationship of conformity with the thing, but only apprehends the thing. The intellect, on the other hand, can know its relationship of conformity; therefore, only the intellect can know truth. This is the reason the Philosopher says in *Metaphysics* 6.4, 1027b26 that truth is only in the mind, that is to say, in knowing truth. To know this relationship of conformity is to judge that a thing is such or is not, which is to compose and divide; therefore, the intellect does not know truth except by composing and dividing through its judgment. The judgment will be true if it is in accordance with things—that is, when it judges a thing to be what it is, or not to be what it is not. The judgment will be false when it is not in accordance with the thing, that is, when it judges that which is, to be not, or that which is not, to be. It is evident from this that truth and falsity as it is in the one knowing and speaking is had only in composition and division.  

[This is what the Philosopher is speaking of here. And since vocal sounds are signs of thought, the vocal sound which signifies true thought will be true, and the one which signifies false thought will be false, although vocal sound insofar as it is a real thing is said to be true in the same way other things are. Thus the vocal sound “man is an ass” is a true vocal sound and a true sign, but because it is a sign of something false, it is said to be false.]  

It should be noted that the Philosopher is speaking of truth here as it relates to the human intellect, which judges of the conformity of things and thought by composing and dividing. However, the judgment of the divine intellect concerning this is without composition and division, for just as our intellect understands material things immaterially, so the divine intellect knows composition and division simply.  

When he says: ***names** **and verbs, then, are like thought without composition or division*** (16a13), he makes clear what he has said about the likeness of vocal sounds to thought.  

First, he manifests his intention;  

second, he proves it by a sign when he says: ***a sign of this*** (16a16; [35]).  

Here he concludes from what has been said that since there is truth and falsity in the intellect only when there is composition or division, it follows that ***names** **and verbs***, taken separately, are like ***thought*** which is ***without composition and division***, as when I say ***“m**an” or “white”*** and nothing else is added. ***For these are neither true nor false at this point***, but when “to be” or “not to be” is added, they become true or false.  

The case of someone giving a single name as a true response to a question is not an instance that can be raised against this position (for example, if someone asks, “What swims in the sea?” and someone answers, “Fish”). This is not opposed to the position Aristotle is taking here, for the verb that was posited in the question is understood.  

And just as the name said by itself does not signify truth or falsity, so neither does the verb said by itself. The verbs of the first and second person and the intransitive verb are not instances opposed to this position either, for in these a particular and determined nominative is understood. Consequently, there is implicit composition, though not explicit.  

Then, when he says: ***a sign of this*** (16a16), he introduces as a sign the composite name “goat-stag,” from “goat” and “stag.” In Greek, the word is “tragelaphos,” from “tragos,” meaning goat, and “elaphos,” meaning stag. Now, names of this kind signify something—namely, certain simple concepts (although the things they signify are composite)—and therefore are not ***true or false*** unless ***“to be” or “not to be”*** is added, by which a judgment of the intellect is expressed. The “to be” or “not to be” can be added either according to present time, which is to be or not to be in act (and for this reason is to be ***simply***); ***or according to time***, either past or future, which is to be relatively, not simply (as when we say that something has been or will be). Notice that Aristotle expressly uses as an example here a name signifying something that does not exist in reality, in which fictiveness is immediately evident, and which cannot be true or false without composition and division.
