# Chapter 6 — The perfection of divine love necessary to salvation

There is another way in which we love God with our whole heart and soul and strength. We so love him, if there be nothing in us which is wanting to divine love; that is to say, if there is nothing which we do not, actually or habitually, refer to God. We are given a precept concerning this form of divine love.  

First, we are taught to refer everything to God as to our end by the words of the Apostle, *whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever else you do, do all to the glory of God* (1 Cor 10:31). We fulfill this precept when we order our life to the service of God; and when, in consequence, all our actions are, virtually, directed to him, save those that are sinful, and which, therefore, withdraw us from him. While we act thus, we love God with our whole heart.  

Second, we love God with our whole mind, when we subject our understanding to him, believing what has been divinely transmitted to us, according to the words of St. Paul, *bringing into captivity every understanding unto the obedience of Christ* (2 Cor 10:5).  

Third, we love God with our whole soul, when all that we love is loved in God, and when we refer all our affections to the love of him. St. Paul expresses this love in the following words: *for whether we be transported in mind it is to God, or whether we be sober, it is for you; for the charity of Christ presses us* (2 Cor 5:13).  

Fourth, we love God with our whole strength, when all our words and works are established in divine charity according to the precept of St. Paul, *let all your things be done in charity* (1 Cor 16:14).  

This, then, is the third degree of perfection of divine love, to which all are bound of necessity and by precept. But the second degree is not possible in this life, save to one who, like our Lord Jesus Christ, is, at the same time, both travelling on the road to heaven, and enjoying the happiness of the blessed.
