# Article 10 — Whether there is any false thing

Tenth, it is asked whether there is any false thing? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.17.1; *In I Sent*., d. 19, q. 5, a. 1; *Commentary on the Metaphysics*, bk. 5, lect. 2; bk. 6, lect. 4; *Commentary on Aristotle's On Interpretation*, bk. 1, lect. 22; bk. 6, lect. 1, 4.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for according to Augustine: *the true is that which is*. *(Augustine, *The Soliloquies*, bk. 2, ch. 5 (PL 32:889).)* Hence, the false is that which is not. Now, what is not is not a thing. Therefore, no thing is false.  

Obj. 2: It was said that the true is a differentia of being; consequently, the false, like the true, is that which is.  

*On the contrary*, no dividing differentia is interchangeable with that whose differentia it is. *(Cf. Porphyry, *Isagoge*, "De differentia".)* Now, as was said, *(Above: a. 1.)* the true is interchangeable with being. Consequently, the true is not a dividing differentia of being, for this would make it possible to call some thing false.  

Obj. 3: *Truth is a conformity of thing and intellect*. *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 1, ch. 9.)* Now, an things are conformed to the divine intellect, since in itself nothing can be other than it is known to be by the divine intellect. Hence, all things are true, and nothing is false.  

Obj. 4: All things possess truth from their forms. For example, one is said to be a true man if he has the true form of a man. But there is nothing which does not have some form, for every act of existing comes from form. *(Boethius, *On the Trinity*, ch. 2 (PL 64:1250B); Alan of Lille, *Regulae de sacra theologia*, rule 14 (PL 210:629C).)* Hence, everything is true, and there is no thing which is false.  

Obj. 5: Good and evil are related as true and false are related. Now, since evil is found in things, it has concrete reality only in something good, as Dionysius and Augustine say. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 20 (PG 3:721A); Augustine, *Enchiridion on Faith, Hope, and Charity*, ch. 14 (PL 40:238).)* Therefore, if falseness is found in things, it can have reality only in what is true. But this does not seem possible, for then the same thing would be both true and false; but this is impossible. This would mean, for example, that man and white are the same because whiteness is made real in a man.  

Obj. 6: Augustine proposes the following difficulty. If a thing is called false, it is either because it is similar or because it is dissimilar. *If because it is dissimilar, there is nothing that cannot be called false, for there is nothing that is not unlike something else. If because it is similar, all things loudly protest, for they are true because they are similar*. *(Augustine, *The Soliloquies*, bk. 2, cc. 1, 8 (PL 32:891).)* Therefore, falsity cannot be found in things in any way.  

On the contrary (1), Augustine defines the false as follows: *the false is that which approaches the likeness of something else without being that whose likeness it bears*. *(Augustine, *The Soliloquies*, bk. 2, ch. 15 (PL 32:898).)* But every creature bears the likeness of God. Therefore, since no creature is identical with God himself, it seems that every creature is false.  

Furthermore (2), Augustine says that: *every body is a true body and a false unity*. *(Augustine, *On True Religion*, ch. 34 (PL 34:150).)* Now, a body is said to be false because it imitates unity, yet is not a unity. Therefore, since every creature, in so far as it is perfect, imitates the divine perfection, and, nevertheless, in any perfection which it has, remains infinitely distant from it, it seems that every creature is false.  

Furthermore (3), the good, like the true, is interchangeable with being. But the interchangeability of the good and being does not stand in the way of a thing’s being evil. Therefore, the fact that the true is interchangeable with being does not stand in the way of a thing’s being false.  

Furthermore (4), Anselm says that there are two kinds of truth in propositions. *The first type occurs when the proposition has the meaning which was given to it.* *(Anselm, *On Truth*, cc. 2, 11 (PL 158:470).)* For example, this proposition, “Socrates sits,” *(This example is from Aristotle, *Topics* 8.10, 160b27; *Metaphysics* 4.2, 1004b2.)* means that Socrates is sitting, whether he is actually sitting or not. *The second type of truth occurs when the proposition signifies that for which it was formed*—and it has been formed to signify that something is when it is. In this respect, a proposition is properly said to be true. In the same way, a thing may be called true when it fulfills its purpose, and false when it does not do so. But everything which falls short of its end does not fulfill its purpose; and, since there are many things of this sort, it seems that many things are false.  

I answer that just as truth consists in an equation of thing and intellect, so falsity consists in an inequality between them. Now, as was said, *(Above: aa. 2, 5, 8.)* a thing is related to divine and human intellects. In regard to everything that is positively predicated of things or found in them, it is related to the divine in one way as the measured to its measure; for all such things come from the divine intellect’s art. A thing is related in another way to the divine intellect: as a thing known is related to the knower. In this way even negations and defects are equated to the divine intellect, since God knows all these even though he does not cause them. It is clear, then, that a thing is conformed to the divine intellect in whatever way it exists, under any for in whatsoever or even under a privation or a defect. Consequently, it is clear that everything is true in its relation to the divine intellect. Hence, Anselm says: *there is, then, truth in the essence of all things which are, for they are what they are in the highest truth.* *(Anselm, *On Truth*, cc. 7–8, 12 (PL 158:475B).)* Therefore, in its relation to the divine intellect, nothing can be false.  

In its relation to a human intellect, however, an inequality of thing with intellect, caused in some way by the thing, is occasionally found; for a thing makes itself known in the soul by its exterior appearance, since our cognition takes its beginning from sense, *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 2.19, 100a10; *Metaphysics* 1.1, 981a2.)* whose direct object is sensible qualities. *(Cf. Avicenna, *Liber de anima seu Sextus de naturalibus* [*On the Soul]*, bk. 2, ch. 2; Averroes, *Physics*, bk. 7, comm. 12.)* For this reason it is said in *On the Soul: accidents greatly contribute to our knowledge of the quiddity.* *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 1.1, 402b21.)* Consequently, when there are manifested in any object sensible qualities indicating a nature which does not actually underlie them, that thing is said to be false. Hence, the Philosopher says that those things are called false *which are such as to seem to be what they are not, or of a kind which they are not*. *(It is actually Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 5.29, 1024b21.)* For example, that is called “false” gold which has in its external appearance the color and other accidents of genuine gold, whereas the nature of gold does not interiorly underlie them. But a thing is not to be the cause of falsity in the soul in the sense that it necessarily causes falsity; for truth and falsity exist principally in the soul’s judgment; and the soul, inasmuch as it judges about things, is not acted upon by things, but rather, in a sense, acts upon them. Hence, a thing is not said to be false because it always of itself causes a false apprehension, but rather because its natural appearance is likely to cause a false apprehension.  

As was pointed out previously, *(Above: aa. 4, 5, 8.)* however, the relation to the divine intellect is essential to a thing; and in this respect a thing is said to be true in itself. Its relation to the human intellect is accidental to it; and in this respect a thing is not true, absolutely speaking but, as it were, in some respect and in potency. Therefore, all things are true absolutely speaking, and nothing is false. But in a certain respect, that is, with reference to our intellect, some things are said to be false. Hence, it is necessary to answer the arguments of both sides.  

Reply Obj. 1: The definition, “the true is that which is,” does not perfectly express the intelligible character of truth. It expresses it, as it were, only materially, unless is here signifies the affirmation of a proposition, and means that a thing is said to be true when it is said to be or to be understood as it is in reality. Taken in this sense, the false may be said to be that which does not exist; it is not as it is said or understood to be. And this type of falsity can be found in things.  

Reply Obj. 2: Properly speaking, the true cannot be a differentia of being, for being does not have any differentia, as is proved in the *Metaphysics.* *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 3.3, 998b22.)* But in some sense the true, as well as the good, is related to being in the manner of a differentia, since it expresses something about being which is not expressed by the noun being; and in this sense the meaning of being is indeterminate with respect to the meaning of the true. Consequently, the meaning of the true is compared to the notion of being somewhat as a differentia is compared to its genus.  

Reply Obj. 3: That argument must be conceded, since it treats a thing in its relation to the divine intellect.  

Reply Obj. 4: All things have some form, yet not everything has that form whose characteristics are externally manifested by sensible qualities; and it is in regard to these that a thing is said to be false if it is naturally apt to produce a false estimation about itself.  

Reply Obj. 5: As is clear from what has been said, something outside the soul is said to be false if it is naturally such as to give a false impression of itself. But what is nothing is not capable of making any impression, since it does not move a knowing power. What is said to be false, therefore, must be a being; and since every being, in so far as it is a being, is true, falsity must exist in things and be based upon some truth. For this reason Augustine says, *that a tragedian representing true persons in dramas would not be false without being a true tragedian. Similarly, a painting of a horse would not be a false horse were it not a true picture*. *(Augustine, *The Soliloquies*, bk. 2, ch. 10 (PL 32:893).)* It does not follow, however, that contradictories are true, because the affirmation and the negation in expressing the true and the false do not refer to the same reality.  

Reply Obj. 6: A thing is said to be false in so far as, by its nature, it is likely to deceive. When I say deceive, however, I mean an action that brings on some defect; for nothing can act except to the extent that it is being, and every defect is non-being. Moreover, everything has some likeness to the true to the extent that it is a being; and in so far as it does not exist it departs from this likeness. Consequently, this deceiving as implying action arises from likeness; but the defect it implies, and in which the intelligible character of falsity formally consists, arises from unlikeness. Hence, Augustine says that falsity arises from unlikeness. *(Augustine, *On True Religion*, ch. 36 (PL 34:152).)*  

Reply Sed Contra 1: The soul is not so constituted as to be deceived by any likeness whatsoever, but only by a considerable resemblance which makes it difficult to discover the unlikeness. Hence, the soul is deceived by similarities, more or less great, according to the varying degrees of its acuteness in discovering unlikenesses. A thing, however, should not be said to be absolutely false because it leads into error, however much it may do that, but only because it is such as to deceive many or highly intelligent men. Now, although creatures bear some resemblance to God in themselves, so great is the dissimilarity between the two that only because of great stupidity could it happen that a mind would be deceived by such similarity. Hence, from the similarity and dissimilarity between creatures and God, it does not follow that all creatures should be called false.  

Reply Sed Contra 2: Some have thought that God is a body; *(The Manichaeans, against whom Augustine argues.)* and, since he is the unity by which all things are one, they consequently thought that body was unity itself, because of its likeness to unity. Therefore, a body is called a false unity for this reason, that it has led or could lead some into the error of believing it to be unity.  

Reply Sed Contra 3: There are two kinds of perfection, first and second. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.1, 412a10; 412a22; cf. Aquinas, *In II Sent*., d. 15, q. 3, a. 1; *SCG* III.64; *ST* I-II.31.1, ad 1; Avicenna, *On the Soul*, bk. 1, ch. 1; Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 2, comm. 5.)* First perfection is the form of each thing, and that by which it has its act of existing. Nothing is without it while it continues in existence. Second perfection is operation, which is the end of a thing or the means by which a thing reaches its end; and a thing is sometimes deprived of this perfection. The note of truth in things results from first perfection; for it is because a thing has a form that it imitates the art of the divine intellect and produces knowledge of itself in the soul. But the note of goodness in things results from its second perfection, for this goodness arises from the end. Consequently, evil, but not falsity, is found in things absolutely.  

Reply Sed Contra 4: According to the Philosopher, *the true itself is the good of the intellect, for an operation of intellect is perfect because its concept is true*. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 6.2, 1139a27.)* And since a proposition is a sign of what is understood, truth is its end. But this is not the case with other things, and so there is no similarity.
