# Article 3 — Whether a man can be taught by an angel

Third, it is asked whether a man can be taught by an angel?  *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.111.1; *In II Sent*., d. 9, a. 2, ad 4; *SCG* III.81; *Disputed Question on Evil*, q. 16, a. 12; *Quodlibet*, bk. 9, q. 4, a. 5.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he cannot, for if an angel teaches, he teaches either from within or from without. But he does not teach from within, for only God can do that, Augustine says. *(Cf. Augustine, *On the Teacher*, bk. 1, ch. 14 (PL 32:1220); however, it is rather found in *On the Letter of John to the Parthians*, tract. 3, ch. 2, para. 13 (PL 35:2004).)* Nor can he teach from without, as it seems, for to teach from without is to teach by means of some sensible signs, as Augustine also says. *(Augustine, *On the Teacher*, ch. 10 (PL 32:1212).)* But angels do not teach us through sensible signs of this sort, unless, perhaps, they appear in a sensible form. Therefore, they do not teach us unless they so appear, an occurrence which is outside the ordinary course of nature, through a miracle, as it were.  

Obj. 2: It was said that angels teach us from without in some manner, inasmuch as they make an impression on our imagination.  

*On the contrary*, a species impressed on the imagination does not suffice for actually imagining unless an intention is present, as is clear from what Augustine says. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 11, cc. 3–4 (PL 42:988–90); *Book on Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 51.)* But an angel cannot bring about an intention in us, since intention is an act of will, on which only God can make an impression. *(Pseudo-Augustine, *De ecclesiasticis dogmatibus*, ch. 83 (PL 58:999B).)* Therefore, an angel cannot teach us even by making an impression on our imagination, since we cannot be taught by means of our imagination unless we actually imagine something.  

Obj. 3: If we are taught by angels who do not appear to us in sensible form, this can happen only if they enlighten our understanding, which, it seems, they cannot do. For they do not give it the natural light, which, since it is concreated along with the mind, is from God alone, nor the light of grace, which only God infuses. Therefore, angels cannot teach us unless they appear in visible form.  

Obj. 4: Whenever anyone is taught by another, the learner must examine the concepts of the teacher, so that in this way the pupil’s mind may reach science through the same reasoning process which the teacher’s mind uses. But a man cannot see the concepts of an angel. For he does not see them in themselves, just as he does not see the concepts of another man. In fact, he sees them much less since they are more unlike his own. Nor, again, does he see them in sensible signs, unless perhaps when the angels appear in sensible form, a possibility which we are not now considering. Therefore, angels are unable to teach us in any other way [that is, except by appearance in sensible form].  

Obj. 5: To teach us is the task of him who *enlightens every man who comes into this world*, as appears in the Gloss *(*Glossa ordinaria,* at Matthew 23:8, 5.380.)* on Matthew 23:8: *one is your master Christ*. But this does not refer to an angel, but only to the uncreated light, as is clear from John 1:9.  

Obj. 6: Whoever teaches another leads him to the truth, and so causes truth in his soul. But only God causes truth, for, since truth is an intelligible light and a simple form, it does not come into existence gradually, and so can be produced only through creation, which is attributed to God alone. Since, therefore, angels are not creators, as Damascene says, *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 3 (PG 94:973B), as Thomas refers in *SCG* II.21.)* it seems that they cannot teach.  

Obj. 7: An unfailing illumination can come only from an unfailing source of light, since the subject ceases to be illuminated when the light leaves. But an unfailing illumination is needed in teaching, for scientific knowledge concerns necessary things, *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.33, 88b30; *Ethics* 6.5, 1140b27–31.)* which always exist. Therefore, teaching comes only from an unfailing light. But the light of angels is not of this kind, since their light fails unless it is divinely conserved. Therefore, an angel cannot teach.  

Obj. 8: In John 1:38, when Jesus asked: *what seek you*? the two disciples of John answered: *Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master,) where dwellest thou*? On this the Gloss *(*Glossa interlinearis,* at John 1:38 (in *Glossa ordinaria* 5.1045).)* reads: *they showed their faith by this name*. Another Gloss *(*Glossa ordinaria,* at John 1:38, 5.1045 (PL 114:361).)* reads that *he asked them not because he did not know, but that they might gain merit by their reply. And when he asked what they sought, they told him a person, not a thing*. From all this we gather that in that answer they confessed that he was a person and showed their faith by this confession. In doing, this they gained merit. But the Christian faith is worthy of merit because we acknowledge that Christ is a divine person. Therefore, to be a teacher pertains only to a divine person.  

Obj. 9: Whoever teaches must disclose the truth. But, since truth is an intelligible light, it is better known to us than an angel is. Therefore, we are not taught by an angel, since that which is better known is not communicated through that which is less well known.  

Obj. 10: Augustine says: *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 3, ch. 8 (PL 42:876).)* *our mind is formed immediately by God without the interposition of any creature.* But an angel is a creature and, so, in the formation of the human mind does not stand between God and the human mind, as something higher than the mind and lower than God. Thus, man cannot be taught by an angel.  

Obj. 11: As our affections reach God himself, so our understanding can attain to the contemplation of his essence. But God himself forms our affections directly through the infusion of grace without the mediation of an angel. Therefore, he also forms our understanding through instruction without an intermediary.  

Obj. 12: All knowledge takes place through some species. Therefore, if an angel is to teach a man, he has to cause in him some species through which the man will know. But he can do this only by creating the species, and an angel has no power at all to do this, as Damascene intends, *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 3 (PG 94:973B), as Thomas refers in *SCG* II.21.)* or by illuminating the species which are in the phantasms, so that intelligible species may result from these in the human potential intellect. This latter seems to be a return to the error of those philosophers *(Cf. Avicenna, *On the Soul*, bk. 5, ch. 5; Alexander Aphrodisias, as Thomas refers in *SCG* II.76; from Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 36.)* who make a separated substance of the agent intellect, whose task it is to illuminate the phantasms. Thus, an angel cannot teach.  

Obj. 13: The intellect of an angel differs more from man’s intellect than the human intellect differs from the human imagination. But the imagination cannot receive that which is in the human intellect. For the imagination can receive only particular forms, such as the intellect does not contain. Therefore, the human intellect, also, is unable to receive those forms which are in the angelic mind. And thus, man cannot be taught through an angel.  

Obj. 14: The light by which something is enlightened should be proportioned to the things which are illumined, as physical light is proportioned to colors. But, since angelic light is purely spiritual, there is no proportion between it and our phantasms, which are in some sense physical, inasmuch as they are retained in a bodily organ. Therefore, angels cannot teach us by illuminating our phantasms, as has been said.  

Obj. 15: Everything which is known is known either through its essence or through some likeness. But an angel cannot cause the knowledge through which the human mind knows things through their essence. For thus, the virtues and other things which are contained in the soul would have to be imprinted by angels, since such things are known through their essence. Similarly, angels cannot cause the knowledge of those things which are known through their likenesses, since the things to be known are closer to these likenesses which are in the knower than an angel is. Therefore, an angel can in no way cause knowledge in a man, and this is to teach.  

Obj. 16: As Augustine clearly shows *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 9, ch. 15 (PL 34:403); bk. 1, ch. 13.)* a farmer is not called a creator even though he stimulates nature from without to produce natural effects. For equal reason, angels ought not be called teachers or masters, although they stimulate the understanding of man to acquire knowledge.  

Obj. 17: Since an angel is superior to man, if he teaches, his instruction must be better than human instruction. But this cannot be, for man can teach about those things which have determinate causes in nature. But angels cannot teach him about other things, such as future contingents, for the natural knowledge of the angels themselves does not extend to these things, since God alone knows such future events. Therefore, angels cannot teach men.  

On the contrary (1), Dionysius says: *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 4, para. 4 (PG 3:181B).)* *I see that angels were first taught the divine mystery of the humanity of Christ, and then through them the gift of knowledge came down to us.*  

Furthermore (2), *a higher agent can do what a lower agent can*, and much more nobly, as is clear from Dionysius. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 12, para. 2 (PG 3:292), cf. also Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 4 (PL 63:849B).)* But the human order is lower than the angelic order. Therefore, since one man can teach another, an angel can do this with much greater reason.  

Furthermore (3), the order of divine wisdom exists more perfectly in spiritual substances than in bodily substances. But it is part of the order of lower bodies that they receive their perfections as the result of the influence of higher bodies. *(Cf. q. 5, a. 9 above.)* Therefore, lower spirits also, namely, human spirits, receive their perfection from the influence of higher spirits, that is to say, angels.  

Furthermore (4), everything which is in potentiality can be developed to actuality through that which is in actuality; and that which is less in actuality can be developed through that which is more completely in actuality. But the angelic intellect is more in actuality than the human intellect. Therefore, the human intellect can be developed to the actuality of knowledge through the angelic intellect. And thus an angel can teach man.  

Furthermore (5), Augustine says *(Augustine, *On the Good of Perseverance*, ch. 19 (PL 45:1023).)* that some receive the doctrine of salvation directly from God, some from an angel, and some from man. Therefore, not only God but angels and men teach.  

Furthermore (6), that which shines its light, as the sun, and one who opens a window which obstructed the light, are both said to illuminate the house. *(Example of Augustine, *Enarrationes in Psalmos*, Ps. 118:73 (PL 37:1553).)* But, although only God infuses the light of truth into the mind, an angel or a man can remove something which prevented perception of light. Therefore, not only God but an angel or a man can teach.  

I answer that an angel influences a man in two ways. In one way the action follows our way of acting, when, for instance, an angel appears to man in a sensible form, either taking on a body or in some other way, and instructs the man by means of sensible speech. We are not now investigating angelic teaching of this sort, for in this way an angel teaches no differently than a man does. The other way in which an angel influences us is the angelic way of acting, that is, invisibly. The purpose of this investigation is to find out how man can be taught in this way by an angel. We must bear in mind that, since an angel is between God and man, due order requires that he should have an intermediate mode of teaching, lower than God’s but higher than man’s. We can see in what sense this is true only if we see how God teaches and how man teaches. To show this we must bear in mind that there is this difference between understanding and bodily sight, namely, that, for the purposes of knowing, all the objects of bodily sight are equally near to it. For a sense is not a power which compares, so that it has to reach one of its objects by means of another. But, for the purposes of knowing, all intelligible things are not equally near to the intellect. Rather, some can be seen immediately, and some can be seen only by examining other principles. Therefore, man gains knowledge of things he does not know through two things: intellectual light and self-evident primary concepts. The latter have the same relation to the intellectual light of the agent intellect as tools to the craftsman. *(Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 36.)*  

Now, God in a most excellent way causes man’s knowledge in both of these ways. For he adorned the soul itself with intellectual light and imprinted on it the concepts of the first principles, which are, as it were, the sciences in embryo, just as he impressed on other physical things the seminal principles for producing all their effects.  

But, since in the order of nature each man shares equally in the specific nature of intellectual light, he cannot in any way be the cause of knowledge in another by causing or increasing that light in him. But he does in a sense cause knowledge in another man as regards the new knowledge which is caused by self-evident principles. He does this, not as one who gives knowledge of the principles, but as one who shows certain sensible signs to the external senses, and thus brings into actuality that which was contained in the principles implicitly and in a certain sense in potentiality, as was said above. *(Above: a. 2.)*  

But, since by nature an angel has intellectual light more perfectly than man, he can cause man to know in both ways, in a manner lower than God, but higher than man. For, as regards the light, although he cannot infuse the intellectual light, as God does, he can strengthen the infused light to make man see more perfectly. For that which is imperfect in a given genus has its power intensified when it is brought in contact with that which is more perfect in that genus. Thus, in bodies, we see that the body which is given position is strengthened by the body giving it position, which is related to it as actuality to potentiality, as is said in the *Physics*. *(Aristotle, *Physics* 4.5, 213a1–10; cf. Averroes, *Physics*, bk. 4, comm. 49.)* As regards principles, too, an angel can teach a man, not, it is true, by giving him knowledge of the principles, as God does, nor by proposing to him under sensible signs the manner in which the conclusions are deduced from the principles, as man does, but by forming in his imagination certain species which can be formed by stimulating the corporeal organ. *(Aristotle, *On Dreams*, ch. 3, 461a15, as Thomas refers in *ST* I.84.8, ad 2.)* This is clearly what happens with persons sleeping and with the insane, who experience different phantasms according to the diversity of vapors which rise to the head. And in this way, *by means of contact with another spirit, it is possible for an angel to use images of this sort to show what he himself knows to the person with whom he has come in contact*, as Augustine says. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 12, ch. 12 (PL 34:464).)*  

Reply Obj. 1: An angel who teaches invisibly teaches interiorly, it is true, in comparison with the instruction of a man who proposes his instruction to the external senses. But in comparison with the teaching of God, who works within the mind by infusing light, the teaching of an angel is classed as external.  

Reply Obj. 2: Although an intention of the will cannot be forced, still an intention of the sensitive part can be forced. For just as, when someone is pricked, he has to pay attention (*intendere*) to the hurt, so, too, with all the other sensitive powers which use a bodily organ. And this attention (*intentio*) is enough for the imagination.  

Reply Obj. 3: An angel does not infuse the light of grace or the light of nature, but strengthens the divinely infused light of nature, as has been said.  

Reply Obj. 4: As in physical things there is an univocal agent, which imprints a form in the same way it has it, and an equivocal agent, which has it in a way different from that in which it imprints it, so also in teaching. For one man teaches another as a kind of univocal agent, and thus communicates knowledge to the other in the same way that he himself has it, by proceeding from causes to the effects. It is for this reason that the concepts of the teacher must be conveyed to the learner through some signs. But an angel teaches as a kind of equivocal cause, for he knows intuitively that which man learns through a process of reasoning. Hence, an angel does not teach a man in such a way that the concepts of the angel are disclosed to the man, but the result is rather this, that the man is made to know in his own way those things which the angel knows in a far different way.  

Reply Obj. 5: Our Lord is speaking of that kind of teaching which befits God alone, as is clear from the Gloss on this passage. We do not ascribe this kind of teaching to an angel.  

Reply Obj. 6: He who teaches does not cause the truth, but knowledge of the truth, in the learner. For the propositions which are taught are true before they are known, since truth does not depend on our knowledge of it, but on the existence of things.  

Reply Obj. 7: Although the knowledge which we get through teaching may be concerned with things that do not cease to be, the knowledge itself can cease to be. Hence, it is not necessary for the illumination of teaching to come from an unfailing light. Or, if it is from an unfailing light as its first principle, this does not entirely exclude a created light capable of failing, from being able to exist as a mediate principle.  

Reply Obj. 8: A certain progression in faith appears in the disciples of Christ, so that at first they respected him as a wise man and a teacher, and later listened to him as God teaching them. Hence, a Gloss a little further on says: *(*Glossa ordinaria,* at John 1:49, 5.1050 (PL 114:363).)* *since Nathanael knew that Christ, though absent, saw what he had done in another place, which is a sign of the Godhead, he acknowledged that Christ was not only a teacher, but also the Son of God*.  

Reply Obj. 9: An angel does not make an unknown truth appear by manifesting its own substance, but by proposing another truth better known, or by strengthening the light of the understanding. Hence, the argument does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 10: It is not Augustine’s intention to say that the nature of the angelic mind is not more excellent than that of the human mind, but that angels are not between God and the human mind in such a way that the human mind receives the ultimate form of its perfection by being united to an angel, as some have held. *(Cf. Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 36; see below, q. 18, a. 5, ad 8.)* They say that the final beatitude of man consists in this, that our understanding is united to an intelligence whose beatitude is union with God himself.  

Reply Obj. 11: There are in us some powers which are constrained by their subject and object, as the sensitive powers, which are stimulated both by excitation of the organ and by the strength of their object. But our understanding is not constrained by its subject, since it does not use a bodily organ. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.4, 429a26, as is said below in q. 18, a. 8, arg. 2.)* Rather, it is constrained by its object, because the effectiveness of a demonstration forces one to assent to a conclusion. However, the affections are constrained neither by their subject nor their object, but move toward one thing or another by reason of their own inclination. Hence, only God, who acts interiorly, can make an impression on the affections. But a man or an angel can, to a certain extent, make an impression on our understanding by representing to the mind the objects by which our understanding is constrained.  

Reply Obj. 12: An angel does not create the species in our mind nor directly illuminate the phantasms. But our understanding can more effectively enlighten phantasms when an angelic light is united to the light of our understanding. Even if an angel did immediately illuminate the phantasms, it still would not follow from this that the opinion of those philosophers would be true. For, although it is the task of the agent intellect to illuminate the phantasms, it could still be said that this is not a function which belongs to it alone.  

Reply Obj. 13: The imagination can receive those things which are in the human understanding, but in a different manner. Similarly, the human understanding in its own manner can receive those things which are in the angelic understanding. But, although the human understanding is more like the imagination by reason of their common subject in so far as both are powers of the one soul, it is more like the angelic intellect by reason of their common genus, for both are immaterial powers.  

Reply Obj. 14: There is nothing to prevent something spiritual from being capable of exercising an influence on something physical, for nothing prevents things which are lower from being acted upon by things which are higher.  

Reply Obj. 15: An angel is not the cause of man's knowledge in so far as a man knows things through their essence, but in so far as he knows things through their likenesses. This does not mean that an angel is closer to things than their likenesses are, but that he makes the likenesses of things appear in the mind either by moving the imagination or strengthening the light of understanding.  

Reply Obj. 16: To create implies first causality, which belongs to God alone; to make implies causality in general; to teach implies the same general causality with reference to knowledge. Thus, only God is called Creator, but God, angels, and men can be called makers and teachers.  

Reply Obj. 17: Just as an angel knows more than man, even about those things which have determinate causes in nature, so he can teach more than man. And the things which an angel does teach he can teach in a more excellent way. Hence, the argument does not follow.
