# Article 10 — Whether prophecy is suitably divided into prophecy of predestination, foreknowledge, and threats

Tenth, it is asked whether prophecy is suitably divided into prophecy of predestination, foreknowledge, and threats? *(Parallel texts: *ST* II-II.174.1; *Commentary on Jeremiah*, ch. 18; *Commentary on Matthew*, ch. 1, lect. 5.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it is not, for when the Gloss divides prophecy, it says: *one type of prophecy is according to foreknowledge, and this must be fulfilled in every way according to the meaning of the words. 'Behold a virgin shall conceive'* (Isa 7:14) *belongs to this type. The other kind of prophecy is a threat, as: 'yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed'* (Jonah 3:4)*. This is not fulfilled in the superficial meaning of the words, but in the meaning of a tacit construction put on the words*. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at the "prothemata" of Psalms, 5.428; Peter Lombard, *Commentary on the Psalms*, preface (PL 191:59B).)* Therefore, it seems that the third division which Jerome made of prophecy of predestination is superfluous. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Matthew 1:22–23, 5.46 (PL 114:71–72).)*  

Obj. 2: That which is a property of all prophecy should not be set down as a member dividing prophecy. But to be according to divine foreknowledge is a property of all prophecy, for, as the Gloss reads: *the prophets read in the book of foreknowledge.* *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Isaiah 38.1, 4.335; cf. Matthew 1:22–23, 5.46.)* Therefore, prophecy according to foreknowledge should not be set down as a division of prophecy.  

Obj. 3: Since foreknowledge is a more general term than predestination, inasmuch as it is part of its definition, *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Romans 8:29, 6:112 (PL 114:498); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on the Letter to the Romans*, at Romans 8:29 (PL 191:1449C).)* foreknowledge can be divided from predestination only with reference to those things in which the extension of foreknowledge is greater than that of predestination. But it is with respect to evil things that the extension of foreknowledge is greater than that of predestination, *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 1, d. 40, prologue.)* for there is foreknowledge of these and not predestination. But there is both foreknowledge and predestination of good things. *(Augustine, *On the Predestination of the Saint*, ch. 10 (PL 44:974); cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 1, d. 40, prologue.)* Therefore, when there is said to be one prophecy of predestination and another of foreknowledge, this means that one concerns good acts and the other evil. But as far as dependence on free will is concerned, there is no difference between good and evil. Therefore, there is no difference at all between these two kinds of prophecy which Jerome distinguishes when he says: *the prophecy of predestination is that which is fulfilled without our free choice, but the prophecy of foreknowledge is that in which our free choice is involved.* *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Matthew 1:22–23, 5.46 (PL 114:71–72).)*  

Obj. 4: As Augustine says, *(Augustine, *On the Predestination of the Saint*, ch. 10 (PL 44:974); cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 1, d. 40, prologue.)* predestination concerns goods connected with salvation. But our merits, also, which depend on free choice, are numbered among these goods. Therefore, our free choice is involved in prophecy of predestination. Thus, Jerome made a poor division. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Matthew 1:22–23, 5.46 (PL 114:71–72).)*  

Obj. 5: Only three things can be considered in prophecy: that from whom it is, that in which it is, and that about which it is. But there is no distinction in that from whom it is, for all prophecy is from one source, the Holy Spirit. Nor is there any difference in that in which it is, for the human spirit is the subject of prophecy. And those things which prophecy concerns are only good and evil things. Therefore, prophecy should be divided only into a division with two members.  

Obj. 6: Jerome says that the prophecy, *behold a virgin shall conceive* (Isa 7:14; Matt 1:23), is a prophecy of predestination. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Matthew 1:22–23, 5.46 (PL 114:71–72).)* But, for the fulfillment of that prophecy, free choice played a part in the assent of the Blessed Virgin. Therefore, the prophecy of predestination has free will involved in it, and, thus, it does not differ from the prophecy of foreknowledge.  

Obj. 7: Every declaration about something future which we do not know will exist, is either false or doubtful to the one making the declaration. But through the prophecy containing a threat one predicts that something will exist, as for example, the destruction of some city. Since this declaration is neither false nor doubtful because there is neither falsity nor doubt in the Holy Spirit, who is the author of the prophecy, this has to be foreknown at least by the Holy Spirit. Therefore, the prophecy containing a threat is not distinct from the prophecy of foreknowledge.  

Obj. 8: When something is predicted according to the prophecy containing a threat, the prediction should be interpreted conditionally or unconditionally. If conditionally, it is not said to belong to prophecy, which consists in a kind of supernatural knowledge, for even natural reason can know that some things will happen if certain conditions are fulfilled. Therefore, it must be interpreted unconditionally. Accordingly, either the prophecy is false, or the outcome is as predicted. And this must be known beforehand by God. Therefore, prophecy containing a threat should not be distinguished from the prophecy of foreknowledge.  

Obj. 9: In Jeremiah 18:8 *(See also Jeremiah 17:18 and 17:24–27.)* there is a similar rule for the fulfillment of divine promises and threats, for the threats are recalled when the nation against whom the threat was made repents of its sins, and similarly the promise ceases when the nation to whom it was made leaves the path of justice. Therefore, just as one makes the prophecy containing a threat a division of prophecy, he ought to make the prophecy containing a promise a fourth division.  

Obj. 10: Isaiah 38:1 spoke prophetically to Ezechias: *take order with your house, for you shall die*. This is not a prophecy of predestination, for that kind must be fulfilled in every way even apart from our free choice. Again, it is not a prophecy of foreknowledge because God did not have foreknowledge of this future event, otherwise there would have been falsity in his foreknowledge. Similarly, it does not belong to prophecy containing a threat, since the event was predicted unconditionally. Therefore, there must be a fourth class of prophecy.  

Obj. 11: It was said that this was predicted to happen according to the lower causes, and thus was a prophecy containing a threat. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Isaiah 38:1, 4.335 (PL 113:1279); from Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 6, ch. 17 (PL 34:350).)*  

*On the contrary*, by the art of medicine man can know the lower causes of the death of a sick man. Therefore, if Isaiah predicted this only according to lower causes, either he did not predict it prophetically, or prophetic prediction does not differ from the prediction of a doctor.  

Obj. 12: Every prophecy deals with things either by viewing the higher causes or by viewing the lower causes. If we take the previously mentioned prophecy as conditional, since it is according to some causes, namely, lower causes, there is equal reason to say that all prophecy is conditional. Thus, all prophecy will have the same character as the prophecy containing a threat.  

Obj. 13: Although the prophecy of threatening is not fulfilled *in the superficial meaning of the words, nevertheless it is fulfilled in the meaning of the tacit construction put on the words*, *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at the "prothemata" of Psalms, 3.428; Peter Lombard, *Commentary on the Psalms*, preface (PL 191:58B-C); Cassiodorus, *Commentary on the Psalms*, preface to ch. 1 (PL 70:12B).)* as Cassiodorus says. Thus, Jonas’ words, *Nineveh shall be destroyed* (Jonah 3:4), were fulfilled according to Augustine, for, *although the walls of Nineveh remained standing, its evil ways were wiped out*. *(Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 21, ch. 24 (PL 41:739).)* But the fulfillment of prophecy, not according to the exterior superficial meaning of the words, but according to their spiritual sense, takes place in the prophecy of predestination and of foreknowledge. We see this in Isaiah 54:11 *I will lay your foundations with sapphires, Jerusalem,* and in Daniel 2:34: *the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and broke in pieces the statue*, and in many other similar passages. Therefore, prophecy containing a threat should not be distinguished from the prophecy of foreknowledge and predestination.  

Obj. 14: If likenesses of future things are shown to someone, he still is not called a prophet unless he understands the things signified through these likenesses. Thus, Pharaoh was not called a prophet when he saw the ears of corn and the cattle, *(Cf. Genesis 41:17–24.)* *for there is need of understanding in a vision*, as Daniel 10:1 says. But those through whom the divine threats are made understand what they declare only according to the superficial meaning of the words, for they are not enlightened about the things which are signified through the words. This is clear in the case of Jonas, who understood that Nineveh was to be overturned materially. *(Jonah 3:4.)* Hence, he grieved as though his prophecy were not fulfilled when the city was not overturned but mended its ways. Therefore, one should not on this account be called a prophet, and, thus, threatening should not be made a species of prophecy. Hence, the distinction previously mentioned seems no distinction at all.  

On the contrary, the opposite appears from the Gloss on Matthew 1:23: *behold a virgin shall conceive*. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Matthew 1:22–23, 5.46 (PL 114:71–72); this verse is actually Isaiah 7:14.)* Here, the above division is given and explained.  

I answer that prophecy is derived from the divine foreknowledge, as has been said above. *(Above: a. 3.)* But we must bear in mind that God knows futures differently from all others who have foreknowledge of them. For there are two things to consider in the knowledge of the future: the order of the causes to the future effects and the outcome or execution of this order in the actual procession of the effects from their causes. Accordingly, no matter what created power has some knowledge of the future, its knowledge reaches only the order of the causes. Thus, a doctor is said to foreknow future death in so far as he knows that natural principles have an ordination to death. And a meteorologist is said to foresee future rains and winds in the same way. Hence, if these causes are such that their effects can be impeded, the event which is thus foreseen to happen does not always come to pass. But God knows the future not only by reason of the order of the causes, but also in the very outcome or execution of that order. The reason for this is that his vision is measured by eternity, *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 6 (PL 63:859A).)* which comprehends all times in one indivisible present. Thus, in one simple glance he sees that to which the causes are ordered and how that order is fulfilled or obstructed. But this is impossible for a creature whose gaze is limited to a determined time. Hence, he knows those things which exist at that time. And at the time when futures are still future they exist only in the order of their causes, and hence, we can know them only in this way. Consequently, it is clear to all who consider it correctly that when we are said to foresee the future we have knowledge more of present things than of the future. And, so, it remains proper to God alone to have true foreknowledge of future events.  

Therefore, prophecy is derived from divine foreknowledge sometimes by reason of the order of the causes and sometimes by reason of the execution or fulfillment of that order. Therefore, when prophetic revelation concerns only the order of the causes, it is called prophecy containing a threat. For, then, all that is revealed to the prophet is that according to the things which now exist such a person is ordained to this or that. The fulfillment of the order, however, takes place in two ways. Sometimes it comes from the activity of the divine power alone, as the resuscitation of Lazarus, *(Cf. John 11:43.)* the conception of Christ, *(Cf. Luke 1:35.)* and things of this sort. And the prophecy of predestination follows this divine activity, for, as Damascene says: *those things which God predestines are not in our power.* *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, cc. 3 and 30 (PG 94:971A).)* Hence, predestination is called a kind of preparatory action on the part of God. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Romans 8:29, 6:112 (PL 114:498); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on the Letter to the Romans*, at Romans 8:29 (PL 191:1449C).)* Now, preparatory action concerns that which one will do himself and not what someone else will do. Some things, however, are brought to completion by the operation of other causes, whether natural or voluntary. These things, in so far as they are accomplished through other causes, are not predestined, but they are nevertheless foreknown. Hence, prophecy of these things is said to be according to foreknowledge. However, since prophecy takes place for the sake of men, the prophecy of foreknowledge especially concerns those things which men do by their free will. For this reason Jerome puts aside other created causes and makes mention only of free will when referring to the prophecy of foreknowledge.  

Reply Obj. 1: The threefold division which Jerome makes is reduced to a twofold division, as has been said, because one division looks to the order of causes and the other to the outcome of that order. This is the division which Cassiodorus held. But Jerome subdivided the second member; thus, Cassiodorus gave two members of the division and Jerome three. Cassiodorus also took foreknowledge in its generality, for it refers to all existing things, whether they come about through created or uncreated power. But Jerome took foreknowledge with a certain restriction, inasmuch as it concerns only those things about which there is no predestination by reason of themselves, that is to say, those things which come to pass by created power.  

Reply Obj. 2: Every prophecy has divine foreknowledge as its root. But, since there is knowledge of the order and the outcome in divine foreknowledge, one kind of prophecy is derived from the one of these and one from the other. However, the foreknowledge of God is properly called foreknowledge in so far as it looks to an outcome which is future. For the order to the outcome is in the present; hence, of it there is knowledge rather than foreknowledge. Thus, not that prophecy which looks to the order, but only that which deals with the outcome, is said to take place according to foreknowledge.  

Reply Obj. 3: Foreknowledge is taken here in contrast with predestination in so far as foreknowledge has a broader extension than predestination. Now, foreknowledge has a broader extension than predestination not only in evil things, if predestination be taken strictly, but also in all good things which do not take place exclusively by the divine power. Hence, the argument does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 4: Our merit is from grace and from free will. However, it belongs to predestination only in so far as it comes from grace, which is from God alone. Hence, that which is from our free will is said to belong to predestination for some extrinsic reason.  

Reply Obj. 5: Here, prophecy is distinguished according to the things of which it treats. This is not according to good and evil, for differences of this sort are related by some extrinsic reason to the future thing which is known through prophecy, but rather according to that which concerns the order or the outcome of the order, as has been said.  

Reply Obj. 6: The consent of the Blessed Virgin intervened in the conception of Christ as something which removed a hindrance and not as an operative cause. For it was not fitting that so great a benefit be given to one who was unwilling.  

Reply Obj. 7: We can say that something will exist not only from the fact that it will exist in this way, but also from the fact that it is so ordained in its causes that it will thus exist. For it is in this way that a doctor says: "that man will be cured or will die." And, if the event prove otherwise, he does not speak falsely. For at that time this was about to take place from the order of the causes, although it was possible for this to be impeded. Then, that which beforehand was going to take place in the event will not take place. For this reason the Philosopher says: *one who is about to enter will not enter.* *(Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 2.11, 337b7.)* And according to this the threat of the prophet is neither false nor doubtful, although what he has predicted does not come to pass.  

Reply Obj. 8: If the prophecy containing a threat is referred to the ordination of causes to which it directly looks, it is consequently free from all condition. For it is absolutely true that it is so ordained in the causes that this happen. But, if it is referred to the event to which it looks indirectly, it must be understood under this condition: if the cause acts. Nevertheless, it is supernatural, because we cannot know by natural knowledge that precisely such or such a punishment is deserved according to divine justice, even if the cause does exist, namely, if the wickedness remain.  

Reply Obj. 9: We take the prophecy containing a promise as belonging to the prophecy containing a threat because both have the same intelligible nature. However, this nature is better expressed in prophecy containing a threat, because threats are more frequently revoked than promises, for God is more inclined to be merciful than to punish. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Jeremiah, prologue from Origen, 4.579; Origen, *Homilies on Jeremiah*, hom. 1, para. 1 (PG 13:255A); see also William of Auxerre, *Summa aurea*, bk. 2, tract. 30, ch. 1.)*  

Reply Obj. 10: That prophecy was a prophecy containing a threat, and although the condition was not stated explicitly, that threat should be interpreted under the implicit condition: if such an order of things continues.  

Reply Obj. 11: Lower causes include not only natural causes, which doctors can know beforehand, but also meritorious causes, which are known from divine revelation alone. Likewise, the natural causes of health or death can be known much more perfectly by divine revelation than by human ingenuity.  

Reply Obj. 12: Higher causes, which are the intelligible natures of things [represented] in the divine foreknowledge, never fail of fulfillment of their effects, as lower causes do. Therefore, the outcomes of things are known absolutely in the higher causes, but only conditionally in lower causes.  

Reply Obj. 13: Although in the prophecy of predestination and of foreknowledge the truth to be fulfilled is presented under some likenesses, no literal sense is understood by reason of those likenesses, but the literal sense is grasped according to those things which are signified through the likenesses, as happens in all metaphorical expressions. *(Aristotle, *Topics* 6.2, 140a10; cf. Aquinas, *In I Sent*., d. 34, q. 3, a. 1, obj. 2.)* Hence, in such prophecies we find no truth in the likenesses, but only in those things which are declared through the likenesses. But, in the prophecy containing a threat, the literal sense of the words of the prophet is considered according to those likenesses of the things which will come to pass, because those likenesses are not given only as likenesses but as things. Hence, that which will come to pass and is represented through likenesses of this sort does not belong to the literal sense, but to the mystical sense. Thus, when it is said that Nineveh will be destroyed, material destruction belongs to the literal sense, but destruction of evil ways belongs to the moral sense. By reason of the order of causes we see some truth in the literal sense itself, as has been said.  

Reply Obj. 14: The ears of corn and the cattle were not shown in Pharaoh’s dream as things, but only as likenesses. Therefore, Pharaoh, who saw only those likenesses, had no understanding of any thing and for this reason was not a prophet. But Jonas, to whom it was said: *Nineveh shall be destroyed* (Jonah 3:4)*,* had some understanding of a thing, namely, of the ordination of merits to destruction, even though, perhaps, he had no foreknowledge of the other thing, namely, the conversion. Thus, he was not a prophet in that which he did not understand. Nevertheless, Jonas and the prophets who threatened knew that the prophecy they foretold was not a prophecy according to foreknowledge, but according to threat. Hence, it is said in Jonah 4:2: *therefore I went before to flee into Tharsis: for I know that you are a gracious and merciful God.*
