# Article 7 — Whether God in the revelation is made to a prophet imprint on the mind of the prophet new species of things or only intellectual light

Seventh, it is asked whether God in the revelation made to a prophet has imprinted on the mind of the prophet new species of things or only intellectual light?  *(Parallel texts: *ST* II-II.173.2; *Commentary on Isaiah,* ch. 1; *Commentary on 1 Corinthians,* ch. 14, lect. 1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he imprints only intellectual light without the species, for the Gloss on the second Epistle to the Corinthians 12:2: says that one is called prophet because of *intellectual sight* alone. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at 2 Cor 12:3, 6.447–48 (PL 114:568); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 2 Corinthians*, at 2 Cor 12:2 (PL 192:81B); from Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 12, ch. 9 (PL 34:461).)* But intellectual sight does not refer to things through likenesses of the things, but through their very essences, as is said in the same Gloss. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at 2 Cor 12:3, 6.447–48 (PL 114:568); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 2 Corinthians*, at 2 Cor 12:2 (PL 192:81A); from Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 12, ch. 6 (PL 34:458).)* Therefore, in prophetic sight no species are imprinted on the mind of the prophet.  

Obj. 2: Our understanding abstracts from matter and material conditions. *(Cf. Avicenna, *On the Soul*, bk. 2, ch. 2.)* If, therefore, in the intellectual sight which constitutes prophecy some likenesses are produced, those likenesses will not be involved with matter or material conditions. Therefore, through them the prophet will not be able to know particular things, but only universals.  

Obj. 3: Prophets have in their minds some species of those things which are revealed to them. Thus, Jeremiah, who prophesied the burning of Jerusalem, had in his soul a species of that city received from sense, and, similarly, he had a species of fire burning, which he had frequently seen. *(Jeremiah 1:13; cf. Aquinas, *Commentary on Jeremaiah*, ch. 1, lect. 5.)* If, then, other species of the same things are imprinted by God on the mind of the prophet, it follows that there would be in the same subject two forms with the same specific nature. But this is incorrect.  

Obj. 4: The sight by which one sees the divine essence is more powerful than the sight by which one sees the species of anything else whatever. But the sight by which one sees the divine essence is not enough to acquire knowledge of all things whatever. Otherwise, those who saw the divine essence would see everything. Therefore, no matter what species are imprinted on the mind of the prophet, they will not be able to cause the prophet to know reality.  

Obj. 5: It is not necessary for the divine action to produce in the prophet that which anyone can do of his own power. But through the power of imagination, which joins and divides the images received from things, anyone can form in his mind the species of anything whatever. Therefore, it is not necessary for the species of things to be impressed by God on the soul of the prophet.  

Obj. 6: Nature works through the shortest way possible; *(Cf. Aquinas, *In III Sent*., d. 23, q. 3, a. 4, qa. 3, s.c. 1; *In IV Sent*., d. 2, q. 1, a. 4, qa. 1, obj. 1; Albert the Great, *In III Sent*., d. 12, a. 4, arg. 3; d. 23, a. 9, arg. 2.)* much more so does God, whose works have even better order. But the shorter way is to bring the prophet to some knowledge of things by means of the species which are in his soul, rather than by other newly imprinted species. Therefore, it does not seem that any species are imprinted anew.  

Obj. 7: The Gloss of Jerome on Amos 1:2 reads: *prophets use likenesses of things with which they are familiar*. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Amos 1:2, 4.1840; from Jerome, *Commentary on Amos*, at Amos 1:2 (PL 25:993A-B).)* But this would not be so if their visions took place through newly imprinted species. Therefore, no new species, but only the prophetic light, is imprinted on the soul of the prophet.  

On the contrary (1), it is not through light, but through a species of something visible, that sight receives the determination to know some definite visible object. Likewise, it is not through the light of the agent intellect, but through an intelligible species, that the potential intellect receives the determination to know intelligible objects. Therefore, since the knowledge of the prophet receives a determination to some things which he did not know before, it seems that the infusion of light without the impression of species is not sufficient.  

Furthermore (2), Dionysius says: *it is impossible for the divine radiance to shine on us unless it is shrouded with a variety of sacred veils*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 1, para. 2 (PG 3:121B).)* But for him figures are veils. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 1, para. 3 (PG 3:124A).)* Therefore, intelligible light is showered on the prophet only with figurative likenesses.  

Furthermore (3), the infusion of light is uniform in all the prophets. But not all the prophets receive uniform knowledge, since some prophesy of the present, some of the past, and some of the future, as Gregory says. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at preface to Ezekiel, 4.1063; from Gregory the Great, *Homilies on Ezekiel*, bk. 1, hom. 1 (PL 76:786A).)* Therefore, there is not only the infusion of prophetic light but the impression of certain species by which the knowledge of the various prophets is distinguished.  

Furthermore (4), the prophet receives the prophetic revelation through internal speech made to him by God or by an angel. This is clear to anyone who looks at the writings of all the prophets. But all speech takes place through some signs. Therefore, prophetic revelation takes place through some likenesses.  

Furthermore (5), the sight of the imagination and of the understanding are higher than bodily sight. But when bodily sight takes place supernaturally, a new bodily species is shown to the eyes of the one who sees, as is evident in the case of the hand of one writing on the wall which appeared to Baltazar (Dan 5:5). Therefore, it is much more necessary for new species to be imprinted on the sight of the imagination and the understanding when these take place supernaturally.  

I answer that prophecy is a kind of supernatural knowledge. But two things are required for knowledge: reception of the things known, and judgment of what is received, as we have said previously. *(Above: a. 3, ad 1.)* Accordingly, knowledge is supernatural sometimes only in reception, sometimes only in judgment, and sometimes in both. However, one is not called a prophet if this knowledge is supernatural only in reception, just as Pharaoh, who supernaturally received a sign of abundance and famine under the figures of oxen and ears of corn (Gen 41:17–36), was not called a prophet. But if someone has supernatural judgment or judgment and reception together, he is called a prophet.  

Now, supernatural reception can take place only through the three kinds of sight: *(Cf. *Glossa ordinaria*, at 2 Cor 12:2, 6.447 (PL 114:568); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 2 Corinthians*, at 2 Cor 12:2 (PL 192:80B-C); see Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 12, ch. 24 (PL 34:474).)* through *bodily sight,* when certain things are shown to the bodily eyes by the divine power, as the hand of one writing was shown to Baltazar (Dan 5:5); through the *sight of imagination,* when by the divine power some figures of things appear to the prophets, as the boiling cauldron appeared to Jeremiah 1:13 and horses and mountains to Zacharias 6:1–6; and through *intellectual sight,* when something is shown to the understanding in a way which surpasses its natural capacity. But, since the human understanding is in natural potency to all the intelligible forms of sensible things, no matter what intelligible species arise in the understanding, there will be no supernatural reception; as there was supernatural reception in bodily vision when it saw things which were not formed naturally, but only by the divine power in order to reveal something. Similarly, there was supernatural reception in the sight of imagination when it saw some likenesses not received from the senses, but fashioned through some force of the soul. But our understanding receives supernaturally only when it sees through their essence the intelligible substances themselves, such as God and the angels. For it cannot reach this by virtue of its nature. But the last of these three supernatural receptions surpasses the mode of prophecy. Hence, we read in Numbers 12:6–8: *if there be among you a prophet of the Lord, I will appear to him in a vision, or I will speak to him in a dream. But it is not so with my servant Moses . . . and plainly, and not in riddles and figures doth he see the Lord*. But to see God in his essence, as he is seen in rapture or by the blessed, or to see other intelligible substances through their essence, surpasses the mode of prophetic sight. But the first supernatural reception, which takes place through bodily sight, is lower than prophetic reception. For in this reception the prophet is not given preference over anyone else, since all can equally see a species which God fashions for sight. Therefore, the supernatural reception which is proper to prophecy is the reception of the sight of imagination. Thus, every prophet has either only supernatural judgment of those things which are seen by another, as Joseph did about the things which Pharaoh saw (Gen 41:14–36), or reception through the sight of imagination together with judgment.  

Therefore, supernatural judgment is given to the prophet through the light infused in him which gives his understanding strength to judge. For this no species are required, but for reception there must be a new formation of species, whether to produce in the mind of the prophet species which were not there previously, as the species of colors might be imprinted on one born blind, or by the divine power to set in order and join the pre-existing species in a way which is capable of signifying the things which should be shown to the prophet. We must concede that revelation is made to the prophet in this way not only through the light, but also through species; but sometimes it is according to the light alone.  

Reply Obj. 1: Although only he who has intellectual sight is called a prophet, yet, not only intellectual light pertains to prophecy, but also the sight of imagination, in which suitable species can be formed to represent singular things.  

Reply Obj. 2: The solution to the second difficulty is clear from the first response.  

Reply Obj. 3: The prophet does not need a new infusion of the species of those things which he has seen, but only an orderly grouping of the species retained in the storehouse of the imaginative power, which can suitably designate the thing to be prophesied.  

Reply Obj. 4: The divine essence, in so far as it exists in itself, represents all things whatsoever more explicitly than any species or figure does. But, since the sight of the one who looks at it is overcome by the loftiness of that essence, the one who sees the essence does not see all that it represents. But the species imprinted on the imagination are proportioned to us; hence, from them we can come to knowledge of things.  

Reply Obj. 5: Just as one who receives knowledge from signs reaches the things themselves by way of the signs, so, conversely, one who uses signs to express something must know the thing represented before he can form the symbol. For one cannot use fitting signs for things which he does not know. Therefore, although any man can by his natural power form any images whatever, only one who knows the future events to be symbolized can form figures to represent them properly. This formation of images in the sight of imagination takes place supernaturally in the prophet.  

Reply Obj. 6: The species pre-existing in the imaginative power of the prophet, in so far as they exist there, are not capable of signifying future things. Therefore, they must be reshaped into something else by the divine power.  

Reply Obj. 7: The species pre-existing in the imagination of the prophet are, as it were, the elements of that sight of imagination which is revealed by the divine power, since it is somehow made up of them. Thus it is that the prophet uses the likenesses of things with which he is familiar.  

But, since prophetic revelation does not always take place through species, as has been said, we must answer the arguments given on the contrary.  

Reply Sed Contra 1: Although the knowledge of the prophet receives no determination to some particular thing from the intellectual light when he receives supernatural judgment alone, his knowledge does receive its determination from species seen by someone else, as Joseph’s knowledge received its determination from the species seen by Pharaoh, or from any species seen by Joseph himself without supernatural aid.  

Reply Sed Contra 2: When the rays of divine light shine on the prophet, they are always veiled in figures, not in the sense that species are always infused, but that these rays are always combined with the pre-existing species.  

Reply Sed Contra 3: The revelation which the prophets receive is also differentiated by reason of the intellectual light, which some perceive more fully than others, and by reason of the species, which either exist beforehand or are received anew by the prophet himself or by another.  

Reply Sed Contra 4: As Gregory says: *God speaks to the angels by the very act by which he shows his invisible secrets to their hearts*, *(Gregory the Great, *Morals on the Book of Job*, bk. 2, cc. 5 and 7 (PL 75:559B).)* and he adds that he speaks to holy souls by infusing certainty in them. *(Gregory the Great, *Morals on the Book of Job*, bk. 2, ch. 7 (PL 75:561A).)* Thus, in speech with which God is said to have spoken to the prophets in Holy Scripture, we consider not only the species of things which are imprinted, but also the light which is given, by which the mind of the prophet is made certain of something.  

Reply Sed Contra 5: Since the sight of understanding and imagination are higher than bodily sight, through them we know not only things which are present, but even things which are absent, whereas with bodily sight we perceive only things which are present. Therefore, the species of things are stored in the imagination and the understanding, but not in the senses. Consequently, for bodily sight to be supernatural new bodily species must always be formed. But this is not needed for the sight of imagination or understanding to be supernatural.
