# Article 5 — Whether moral goodness is required for prophecy

Fifth, it is asked whether moral goodness is required for prophecy?  *(Parallel texts: *ST* II-II.172.4; *Commentary on John,* ch. 11, lect. 7.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it is, for in Wisdom 7:27 we read: *through prophecies [she] conveys herself into holy souls, she makes the friends of God and prophets.* But only those who have moral goodness are the friends of God. As the Gospel of St. John 14:23 says: *if anyone love me, he will keep my word.* Therefore, one who does not have moral goodness is not appointed a prophet.  

Obj. 2: Prophecy is a gift of the Holy Spirit. But the Holy Spirit does not dwell in a sinner. As Wisdom 1:5 says: *for the Holy Spirit of discipline will flee from the deceitful.* Therefore, the gift of prophecy cannot exist in a sinner.  

Obj. 3: That which one cannot put to an evil use cannot exist in a sinner. But no one can put prophecy to an evil use for, since the act of prophecy is from the Holy Spirit, if someone put it to an evil use, sin and the Holy Spirit would be causes of the same act. And this cannot be. Therefore, prophecy cannot exist in a sinner.  

Obj. 4: The Philosopher says: *if prophecy through dreams comes from God, it is unfitting for him to give it to any but the best men.* *(Aristotle, *On Sleep*, ch. 1, 462b20.)* But it is clear that the gift of prophecy is from God alone. Therefore, it is unfitting to say that it is given to any but the best men.  

Obj. 5: Plato says that it belongs to that which is best to produce what is best. *(It is actually Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 19 (PG 3:716B); cf. Plato, *Timaeus* 17c; *Symposium* 197c; see also 212a; Bonaventure, *In I Sent.,* d. 44, a. 1, q. 2, contra 2; Aquinas, *In I Sent*., d. 44, q. 1, a. 1, obj. 1.)* But prophecy is more suitable in a good man than in a bad one. Therefore, since God is best, he will never give the gift of prophecy to evil men.  

Obj. 6: We find a likeness of the divine activity in the activity of nature. Hence, Dionysius compares the divine goodness to the light of the sun, because of the similarity of their effects. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, paras. 1, 4 (PG 3:693B, 697B).)* But natural activity gives more perfections to the things which are more disposed, as the more permeable bodies receive more light from the sun. Therefore, since the good man is more disposed to receive the gift of prophecy than the evil man, it seems that it should be given much more to good men than to evil men. But it is not given to all good men. Therefore, it should not be given to any evil man.  

Obj. 7: Grace is given to elevate nature. But nature should be elevated more in good men than in evil men. Therefore, the grace of prophecy should be given to good men rather than to evil men. We conclude as before.  

On the contrary (1), Balaam is said to have been a prophet, yet he was evil. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Numbers 22:20, 1.1333 (PL 113:420); cf. *ST* II-II.172.6, s.c.)*  

Furthermore (2), in the Gospel of St. Matthew 7:22, this statement is put in the mouth of the damned: *Lord, have not we prophesied in your name*? Therefore, prophecy can exist in evil men.  

Furthermore (3), whoever does not have charity is evil. But prophecy can exist in one who does not have charity, as is clear from the first Epistle to the Corinthians 13:2 which says: *and if I should have knowledge and should know all mysteries . . . and have not charity.* Therefore, prophecy can exist in a sinner.  

I answer that man’s goodness consists in charity, through which he is united to God. Therefore, whatever can exist without charity, can be found indifferently in good men and in evil men. For the divine goodness is held in high esteem chiefly for this, that it uses both good and evil men to implement its designs. Therefore, it gives to both good and evil those gifts which do not have a necessary dependence on charity. Now, prophecy does not have any necessary connection with charity for two reasons. First, because prophecy is in the understanding and charity is in the affections. But the understanding has priority over the affections, and, thus, prophecy and the other perfections of the understanding do not depend on charity. And for this reason faith, prophecy, knowledge, and everything else of this sort can exist in good men and in evil men. The second reason is that prophecy is given to a person for the profit of the Church and not for himself. But it does happen that someone who is not good in himself and united to God by charity can be of profit to the Church in some fashion. *(Cf. 1 Cor 12:7.)* Thus, prophecy, the working of miracles, ecclesiastical ministries, and all the other things of this sort, which contribute to the benefit of the Church, are sometimes found apart from charity, which alone makes men good.  

However, we must bear in mind that some of the sins by which charity is lost hinder the use of prophecy, and some do not. For, since sins of the flesh draw the mind entirely away from things spiritual, by the very fact that one is given to sins of the flesh he is rendered unfit for prophecy. For the mind must have supreme competence in things spiritual to have the revelation of prophecy. But spiritual sins do not to the same extent interfere with the mind’s competence in spiritual things. Therefore, it happens that one who is a slave to spiritual sins, but not to those of the flesh, or even to the endless cares of this life, which withdraw the mind from its spiritual competence, can be a prophet. And, therefore, Rabbi Moses says that entanglement in the pleasures and cares of this world is a sign that one is a false prophet. *(Moses Maimonides, *Guide for the Perplexed*, part 2, ch. 41.)* And this agrees with what we read in the Gospel of St. Matthew 7:15: *beware of false prophets*, and a little later 7:16: *by their fruits you shall know them*. The Gloss on this passage reads that this must be understood of those sins *which are in plain sight*, *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Matthew 7:15, 5.150 (PL 114:110).)* and the foremost of these are the sins of the flesh, for spiritual sins lie hidden within.  

Reply Obj. 1: Wisdom enters the soul in two ways. In one way, it so enters that the very wisdom of God dwells in the soul. This makes the man holy and a friend of God. In the other way, it enters only in its effects. In this way it does not have to make the man holy or a friend of God. It is in this second way that it enters the minds of the evil men whom it makes prophets.  

Reply Obj. 2: Although prophecy is a gift of the Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit is not given with the gift of prophecy, but only with the gift of charity. Hence, the reasoning does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 3: There is never an evil use of prophecy in the sense that the act itself of prophecy, in so far as it comes from prophecy, is evil. For, when someone directs the act of prophecy toward some evil end, the act itself of prophecy is good and comes from the Holy Spirit, but the direction of that act toward an improper end does not come from the Holy Spirit, but from the perverse will of man.  

Reply Obj. 4: The Philosopher intends to say that those things which are given by God depend on the will of the giver, and this will cannot be unreasonable. Hence, if the foreknowledge of the future which takes place in dreams were from God, some discrimination would appear in its infusion. But there is no discrimination there, since such divination takes place in anybody, and this shows that divination of dreams comes from nature. But we find discrimination in the gift of prophecy, for it is not given to everybody, even though they have this or that disposition, but only to those whom the divine will chooses. Nevertheless, these are not apt subjects or the best subjects simply in themselves. They are, however, apt subjects in so far as they perform the function of the prophet to the extent which the divine wisdom judges to be fitting.  

Reply Obj. 5: That God is best appears in this, that he knows how to make good use not only of good men, but also of evil men. Hence, if he makes evil prophets perform the good functions of prophecy, this in no wise detracts from his supreme goodness.  

Reply Obj. 6: Not every good man is more fit to become a prophet than every sinner. For some who lack charity have minds more fit to perceive spiritual things, since they are free from carnal affections and worldly cares and are gifted with a natural clarity of understanding. And, on the other hand, some who have charity are occupied with worldly business, are busy begetting children, and do not have a naturally acute understanding. Therefore, because of these and similar conditions, the gift of prophecy sometimes is given to some evil men and denied to some good men.  

Reply Obj. 7: Through the grace of prophecy man’s nature receives an elevation ordained not directly to the participation of glory, but to the utility of others. However, in good men, nature rather receives an elevation ordained to the obtaining of glory from the grace which makes its recipient pleasing to God. Hence, the reasoning does not follow.
