# Article 1 — What is rapture

The question is about rapture. First, it is asked what is rapture? The masters *(Albert the Great, q. "On Rapture," *Solutio. Dicendum videtur secundum magistros qui fuerunt ante nos, quod raptus est ab eo quod est secundum naturam in id quod est praeter naturam elevatio vi superioris naturae, unde elevatio haec est quodam modo praeter naturam, in quodam modo supra, et quodam modo contra.*)* describe it in this way: *rapture is elevation, by the power of a higher nature, from that which is according to nature to that which is contrary to nature*. *(Parallel texts: *ST* II-II.175.1; *Commentary on 2 Corinthians*, ch. 12, lect. 1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that rapture is unsuitably described, for Augustine says: *man’s understanding knows God naturally.* *(Pseudo-Augustine, *On the Spirit and the Soul*, ch. 11 (PL 40:787), as is said above in q. 8, a. 3, obj. 13, and below in a. 3, obj. 7; cf. Augustine, *On Free Will*, bk. 2, ch. 9.)* But, in rapture, man’s understanding is raised to a knowledge of God. Therefore, it is not raised to that which is contrary to nature, but to that which is according to nature.  

Obj. 2: A created spirit depends more on the uncreated spirit than a lower body depends on a higher body. But impressions from higher bodies are natural to lower bodies, as the Commentator says. *(Averroes, *On the Heavens*, bk. 3, comm. 20.)* Therefore, elevation of the human spirit, even though it takes place in virtue of a higher nature, is only natural.  

Obj. 3: The Gloss on Romans 11:24, *contrary to nature [thou] wert grafted into the good olive tree*, reads that *God, the author of nature, does nothing contrary to nature, since that which each one receives from the source of all rule and order of nature is the nature for it*. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Romans 11:24, 6.150 (PL 114:508); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Romans*, at Romans 11:24 (PL 191:1488B).)* But the elevation of rapture is from God, who is the Creator of human nature. Therefore, it is not against nature but according to it.  

Obj. 4: It was said that it is against nature because it is done in a divine manner and not in the manner of human spirit.  

*On the contrary*, Dionysius says: *we see the justice of God in this that he distributes [his goods] to all things according to the measure of their worth*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 8, para. 7 (PG 3:893D).)* But God cannot do anything contrary to his justice. Therefore, he does not give a thing something which is not according to its manner of being.  

Obj. 5: If man’s manner is changed in some respect, it is not changed in such a way that man’s proper good would be taken away. For, as Augustine says, *(Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 3 (PL 40:11).)* God is not the cause of man’s deterioration. But man’s proper good is to live according to reason and to act in a voluntary way, as is clear in Dionysius. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 32 (PG 3:733A).)* Therefore, since violence is contrary to what is voluntary and does away with the good of reason, for *necessity causes sorrow since it is contrary to the will*, as is said in the *Metaphysics*, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 5.5, 1015a28.)* it seems that God brings about no violent elevation in man contrary to nature. Now, this is what seems to take place in rapture, as the very name implies, and as the previously mentioned description points out in the words, *by the power of a higher nature.*  

Obj. 6: According to the Philosopher, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.4, 429a29.)* excessive intensity of sensible objects destroys the senses, but excessive intensity of intelligible objects does not destroy the understanding. Now, the senses fail of the knowledge of intense sensible objects because they are destroyed by them. Therefore, the understanding can know intelligible objects naturally no matter how intense they are. Hence, no matter to what intelligible objects the mind of man is raised up, the elevation will not be contrary to nature.  

Obj. 7: Augustine says that *angels and souls have similar natures but dissimilar duties*. *(More correctly Augustine, *On Free Will*, bk. 3, ch. 11 (PL 32:1287).)* Now, it is not contrary to the nature of an angel to know the things to which man is raised in rapture. Therefore, for man, the elevation of rapture is not contrary to nature.  

Obj. 8: If any movement is natural, arrival at the term of the movement will also be natural, since no movement is infinite. But the mind of man is naturally moved toward God. This is clear from the fact that it rests only when it has reached God. Hence, Augustine says: *you made us for thee, Lord; and our heart is not at rest until it rests in thee.* *(Augustine, *Confessions*, bk. 1, ch. 1 (PL 32:661).)* Therefore, the elevation by which the mind reaches God, as happens in rapture, is not contrary to nature.  

Obj. 9: It was said that it is not natural for the human mind to be drawn to God by reason of the mind itself, but by reason of an ordination of God. Thus, it is not natural simply.  

*On the contrary*, a lower nature does not engage in activity or tend toward any end except by reason of a divine ordination. It is for this reason that every natural work is called a work of intelligence. *(Albert the Great, e.g. *De animalibus*, bk. 1, tract. 2, ch. 12, n. 274; bk. 2, tract. 1, ch. 1, n. 11 (St 97 and 227). Thomas commonly attributes this saying to Aristotle and the Philosophers, e.g. above, q. 5, a. 2, resp.; *In I Sent.*, d. 35, a. 1; *In II Sent.*, d. 25, a. 1.)* Nevertheless, we say that the movements and activities of natural things are simply natural. Therefore, to be drawn toward God should also be judged simply natural if it is natural to the mind by reason of a divine ordination.  

Obj. 10: The soul, in so far as it exists in itself and is thus called a spirit, is prior to the soul as joined to the body and, accordingly, called a soul. *(Cf. Pseudo-Augustine, *On the Spirit and the Soul*, ch. 9 (PL 40:784).)* But the activity of the soul as a spirit is to know God and the other separated substances. But, in so far as it is joined to the body, its activity is to know corporeal and sensible things. Therefore, the capacity of the soul to know intelligible things is prior to that to know sensible things. Since, therefore, it is natural for the soul to know sensible things, it is also natural for it to know divine intelligible things. Thus, we conclude as before.  

Obj. 11: The ordination of a thing to its final end is more natural than the ordination to the means, for the ordination to the means exists because of the ordination to the final end. But sensible things are the means by which we reach the knowledge of God, as we see in Romans 1:20: *for the invisible things of him . . . are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made*. But the knowledge of sensible things is natural to man. Therefore, knowledge of intelligible things is also natural. We conclude as before.  

Obj. 12: Nothing that takes place by a natural power can be said to be unconditionally contrary to nature. But certain things, such as herbs or stones, *(The poppy, as Albert the Great refers in *On Vegetables and Plants*, bk. 6, tract. 2, ch. 15, and the thunderstone (thunderegg) and the magnes (granular form of magnetite), as the same refers in *On Minerals*, bk. 2, tract. 2, cc. 3 and 11.)* have natural powers to release the mind from the senses, so that wonderful visions are beheld. This is what seems to happen in rapture. Therefore, rapture is not an elevation contrary to nature.  

On the contrary, the Gloss on the passage in the second Epistle to the Corinthians 12:2, *I know a man in Christ*, says: *rapture, that is exaltation contrary to nature*. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at 2 Cor 12:2, 6.447 (PL 114:568); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 2 Corinthians*, at 2 Cor 12:2 (PL 192:80A).)* Therefore, rapture is an elevation contrary to nature.  

I answer that just as everything else has a certain activity which is natural to it in so far as it is this thing, fire or a stone, for example; so, too, man as man has a certain activity which is natural to him. Now, in physical reality the natural activity of a thing may be modified in two ways. In one, the change arises from a deficiency of its proper power, whatever be the source of such a deficiency, whether an extrinsic or an intrinsic cause. Thus, an abnormal fetus is produced because of a lack of formative power in the seed. *(Avicenna, *Canon of Medicine*, bk. 3, fen. 20, tract. 1, ch. 3; and Averroes, *Metaphysics*, bk. 7, comm. 31, as Aquinas refers in *In II Sent.*, d. 18, q. 2, a. 3; cf. Albert the Great, *De animalibus*, bk. 3, tract. 2, n. 155 (St I, 346); bk. 16, tract. 1, ch. 4, nn. 25–26 (St II, 1072–1073).)* In the other way, the change arises from the activity of the divine power, whose will all nature obeys. This happens in miracles, as when a virgin conceives or a blind man is made to see. Similarly, man’s natural and proper activity can be modified in two ways. Man’s proper activity, however, is to understand through the mediation of sense and imagination. For the activity by which he fixes on intellectual things alone, passing over all lower things, does not belong to man as man, but in so far as something divine exists in him, as is said in the *Ethics.* *(Aristotle, *Ethics*, 10.7, 1177b27.)* Moreover, the activity by means of which he grasps only sensible things apart from understanding and reasoning does not belong to him as man, but according to the nature which he has in common with the brute animals. Therefore, when man is transported out of his senses and sees things beyond sense, his natural mode of knowing is modified. Sometimes, this change takes place because of some deficiency in man’s proper power, as happens with insane people and others who are mentally deranged. This kind of transport out of their senses is not an elevation but rather a debasing of man. Sometimes, however, such transport takes place through the divine power, and then it is properly an elevation. *(Cf. Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 12, ch. 19 (PL 34:470).)* For, since the agent makes that which is passive like itself, *(Cf. Aquinas, *In II Sent.*, d. 18, q. 2, a. 1, ad 4; *SCG* I.49; II.46; Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 1.7, 324a10; *On the Soul* 2.11, 424a1.)* the transport which takes place by the divine power, and which is above man, has an ordination to something higher than that which is natural to man. Thus, in the foregoing description of rapture, which defines it as a movement, *elevation* gives its genus, and *by the power of a higher nature* gives the efficient cause. *From that which is according to nature to that which is contrary to nature* gives the starting point and the term of the movement.  

Reply Obj. 1: One can know God in many ways: through his essence, through sensible things, or through intelligible effects. We have to make a similar distinction about that which is natural to man. For something is contrary to nature and according to nature for one and the same thing according to its different states, because the nature of the thing is not the same when it is in the state of becoming and when it has complete existence, as Rabbi Moses says. *(Moses Maimonides, *The Guide for the Perplexed*, bk. 2, ch. 18.)* Thus, full stature and other things of the kind are natural to man when he has reached maturity, but it would be contrary to nature for a boy to have full stature at birth. Thus, it must be said that to know God in some fashion is natural for the human intelligence according to any state. But in the beginning, that is, in this life, it is natural for it to know God through sensible creatures. It is also natural for it to reach the knowledge of God through himself when it reaches its full perfection, that is, in heaven. Thus, if in this life it is raised to the knowledge of God which it will have in heaven, this will be contrary to nature, just as it would be contrary to nature for a baby boy to have a beard.  

Reply Obj. 2: Nature can be taken in two ways: in particular, as proper to each thing, and in general, as embracing the whole order of natural causes. For this reason a thing is said to be according to nature or contrary to nature in two ways: in one, with reference to nature in particular; in the other, with reference to nature in general. Thus, every deficiency, decay, and the weakness of old age is contrary to nature in particular, but, according to nature in general, it is natural for everything which is composed of contraries to decay. Therefore, since the universal order of causes is so ordained that lower things should be moved by those which are higher, all movement which takes place in lower nature because of the impressions of what is higher, whether this be in physical or in spiritual things, is natural according to universal nature, but not according to particular nature unless the impression made on the lower nature by the higher nature is such that the very impression is its nature. Thus, it is clear how the effects which God brings about in creatures can be called according to nature or contrary to nature.  

Reply Obj. 3: The answer to the third difficulty is clear from this. Or else we should say that that elevation is called contrary to nature because it is contrary to the ordinary course of nature, as the Gloss explains. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Romans 11:24, 6.150 (PL 114:508); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Romans*, at Romans 11:24 (PL 191:1488B).)*  

Reply Obj. 4: Although God never acts contrary to justice, he sometimes does do something beyond justice. For a thing is contrary to justice when something one deserves is taken away from him. This is clear in human dealings when someone robs another. But, if out of liberality one gives what is not deserved, this is not contrary to justice, but beyond it. Accordingly, when in this life God raises a human mind above its proper level, he does not act contrary to justice, but beyond it.  

Reply Obj. 5: By the very fact that a man’s work has a meritorious value it must be under the direction of reason and the will. But the good which is imparted to a work in rapture is not of this sort. Hence, it is not necessary that it proceed from the human will, but only from the divine power. Nevertheless, we cannot call it violence in every respect, unless in the sense that we say there is violent movement when a stone is thrown down faster than it would fall by its natural motion. Nevertheless, properly speaking, *that is violent in which that which is passive contributes nothing,* as is said in the *Ethics*. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 3.1, 1110a1; 1110b15.)*  

Reply Obj. 6: Understanding and sense have this in common, that both fail of perfect perception of an excessively intense object, although both perceive something of it. The difference lies in this, that sense is destroyed by an excessively intense sensible object, so that afterwards it cannot know lesser sensibles, but understanding is strengthened through reception of an excessively intense intelligible object, so that afterwards it can know lesser intelligible objects better. Hence, the authoritative statement of the Philosopher cited above is not to the point.  

Reply Obj. 7: Angels and souls are said to be equal in nature only in relation to the state of final perfection in which men *will be like angels in heaven*, as is said in Matthew 22:30, or in so far as they share in intellectual nature, although it is more perfect in the angels.  

Reply Obj. 8: Arrival at the term of natural movement is natural, not in the beginning or middle of the movement, but at the end. Hence, the argument does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 9: Activities of physical things which come from a divine ordination are said to be natural when the sources of these activities are implanted in things in the way in which their natures are. However, God does not ordain the elevation of rapture for man in this way. Hence, they are not alike in this respect.  

Reply Obj. 10: That which is prior in the intention of nature is sometimes subsequent in time, as actuality relates to potentiality in the same receiving subject, for to be in act is prior in nature, although in time one and the same thing is first in potentiality before it is in actuality. In like manner, the activity of the soul, in so far as it is a spirit, is prior, relative to the intention of nature, but subsequent in time. Hence, if one activity takes place at the time for another activity, this is contrary to nature.  

Reply Obj. 11: Although the ordination to the means is because of the ordination to the final end, it is only through the means that one arrives naturally at the final end. If it happens otherwise, the arrival is not natural. And it is thus in the case in question.  

Reply Obj. 12: The transport out of the senses which is brought about by the power of physical things is classified with that transport which takes place because of a deficiency of the proper power. For the nature of those things is such that they can effect a transport out of the senses only in so far as they deaden the senses. Hence, it is clear that such transport from sense is foreign to rapture.
