# Article 8 — Whether the first truth is the proper object of faith

Eighth, it is asked whether the first truth is the proper object of faith?  *(Parallel texts: *ST* II-II.1.1; *In III Sent*., d. 24, a. 1, qa. 1; *Disputed Questions on the Virtues*, q. 4, a. 1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it is not, for faith is explained in the Creed. But in the Creed there are included many things which refer to creatures. Therefore, first truth is not the only object of faith.  

Obj. 2: It was said that those things in the Creed which refer to creatures belong to faith non-essentially and secondarily.  

*On the contrary*, by its nature the consideration of a science extends to everything within the power of the proper means from which it proceeds. But the means of faith is belief in God when he says something. For a believer is moved to assent because he thinks something was said by God. But we should believe God’s word not only about first truth, but about any truth. Therefore, any truth is of itself the subject matter and object of faith.  

Obj. 3: Acts are distinguished through their objects. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.6, 415a18.)* But the act of faith and the vision of God in himself are different acts. Therefore, since the object of the aforesaid vision is first truth itself, that will not be the object of the act of faith.  

Obj. 4: First truth is related to faith as light is to sight. But, of itself, light is not an object of sight; rather, color in act is, as Ptolemy says. *(Ptolemy, *Optics*.)* Therefore, first truth is not the essential object of faith.  

Obj. 5: Faith deals with propositions, for these alone can be true and an object of someone’s assent. But first truth is not a proposition. *(Aristotle, *Categories,* ch. 2, 1a16.)* Therefore, the object of faith is not first truth.  

Obj. 6: If first truth were the essential object of faith, nothing which refers entirely to creatures would pertain to faith. But the resurrection of the body refers entirely to creatures, and still is numbered among the articles of faith. Therefore, first truth is not the only essential object of faith.  

Obj. 7: Just as the visible is the object of sight, so the credible is the object of faith. But many other things besides first truth are credible. Therefore, first truth is not the essential object of faith.  

Obj. 8: Things related are known with the same act of knowledge because one is included in the understanding of the other. *(Aristotle, *Categories,* ch. 7, 8a35.)* But Creator and creature are thus related. Therefore, any cognitive habit which has the Creator as its object will have the creature as its object. So, first truth cannot alone be the object of faith.  

Obj. 9: In any knowledge the object is that to which the process leads us. That through which the process leads us to the object is the means. But in faith, by reason of first truth we are led to assent to certain truths about God and creatures, in so far as we believe God to be truthful. Therefore, first truth does not have the role of object of knowledge, but of means to knowledge.  

Obj. 10: Faith, like charity, is a theological virtue. But charity has not only God, but also the neighbor, for its object. Hence, there are two commandments of charity concerning love of God and of the neighbor. Therefore, faith, also, has for its object not only first truth but also created truth.  

Obj. 11: Augustine says *(Augustine: from *Glossa ordinaria*, at 1 Cor 13:12, 6.315–16; Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 1 Corinthians,* at 1 Cor 13:12 (PL 191:1662D).)* that in heaven we shall see things themselves, though here we look at the images of things. But the sight of faith belongs to this life. Therefore, the sight of faith takes place through images. But the images through which our understanding sees are created things. Therefore, the object of faith is created truth.  

Obj. 12: Faith is a mean between scientific knowledge and opinion, as is clear from the definition of Hugh of St. Victor. *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments,* bk. 1, part 10, ch. 2 (PL 176:330C); Pseudo-Hugh of St Victor, *Summa Sententiarum*, tract. 1, ch. 5.)* But scientific knowledge and opinion deal with a proposition. Therefore, faith does, also. Hence, first truth, which is a concept, cannot be its object.  

Obj. 13: Prophetic revelation, through which things divine are announced to us, seems to be a source of faith. But the object of prophecy is not first truth, but, rather, created things, which are subject to determinate temporal differences. Therefore, first truth is not the object of faith.  

Obj. 14: Contingent truth is not first truth. But at least one truth of faith is a contingent truth. For it was contingent that Christ suffer, since it depended on his free will and that of those who killed him. Nevertheless, we have faith in the Passion of Christ. Therefore, first truth is not the proper object of faith.  

Obj. 15: Faith, properly speaking, is concerned only with propositions. But first truth is in certain articles of faith without the complexity of a proposition, as when we say: God, who suffered, or God, who died. Therefore, first truth is not there considered as the object of faith.  

Obj. 16: First truth has a double relation to faith: as that which bears witness, and as that with which faith is concerned. In so far as it bears witness, it cannot be called the object of faith, for under this aspect it is outside the essence of faith. Nor is it the object of faith in so far as it is that with which faith is concerned, for, thus, any proposition formed about first truth would be an object of faith. And this is evidently false. Therefore, first truth is not the proper object of faith.  

On the contrary (1), Dionysius says *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names,* ch. 7, para. 4 (PG 3:873A).)* that faith is *concerned with the simple and never changing truth*. But only first truth is such. Therefore.  

Furthermore (2), a theological virtue has the same thing for its end and its object. But the end of faith is first truth, the plain sight of which faith merits. Therefore, its object, too, is first truth.  

Furthermore (3), Isidore says *(We did not find this citation; the same definition without the name of the author is praised in Philip the Chancellor, *Summa de bono* (ms. Vat. lat. 7669 f.85ra); cf. Albert the Great, *In III Sent.,* d. 24, a. 4.)* that an article [of the Creed] is the perception of divine truth. But faith is contained in the articles [of the Creed]. Therefore, divine truth is the object of faith.  

Furthermore (4), as charity is related to the good, so faith is related to the true. But the essential object of charity is the highest good, because charity loves God and the neighbor because of God. Therefore, the object of faith is first truth.  

I answer that the essential object of faith is first truth. This should be understood from the following. Only that habit has the character of virtue whose act is always good. Otherwise, a virtue would not be the perfection of a power. Accordingly, since the act of our understanding is good because it considers the true, it must be impossible for a habit existing in the understanding to be a virtue unless it is such that by it one infallibly speaks the truth. For this reason opinion is not an intellectual virtue, whereas scientific knowledge and understanding of principles are, as is said in the *Ethics.* *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 6.3, 1139b13; 6.6, 1140b31; 6.7, 1141a16.)* However, faith cannot thus stand as a virtue, deriving from the evidence of things, since it deals with things which do not appear. Consequently, it must derive this infallibility from its adherence to some testimony in which the truth is infallibly found. But, just as every created being of itself is empty and liable to fail, *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis,* bk. 4, ch. 12 (PL 34:383); Gregory the Great, *Morals on the Book of Job,* bk. 16, ch. 37 (PL 75:1143C); cf. *ST* I.104.1.)* unless it is supported by uncreated being, so all created truth is liable to fail except in so far as it is regulated by uncreated truth. Hence, to assent to the testimony of a man or an angel would lead infallibly to the truth only in so far as we considered the testimony of God speaking in them. Consequently, faith, which is classified as a virtue, must surpass the truth of man’s own understanding and thus make it embrace that truth which is in the divine knowledge. In this way, *through the simple and never-changing truth, the believer is freed from the instability and multiplicity of error*, as Dionysius says. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names,* ch. 7, para. 4 (PG 3:873A).)* Now, the truth of the divine knowledge is so constituted that it belongs first and foremost to the uncreated thing itself, but to creatures somehow subsequently, in so far as by knowing itself it knows everything else. Hence, faith, which through assent unites man to divine knowledge, has God as its principal object, and anything else as a consequent addition.  

Reply Obj. 1: All those things included in the Creed which refer to creatures are matters of faith only in so far as something of first truth is connected with them. For the Passion itself is not an object of faith except in so far as we believe that God suffered, nor is the Resurrection an object of faith except in so far as we believe that it took place through divine power.  

Reply Obj. 2: Although we must believe everything because of the divine testimony, the divine testimony, like the divine knowledge, first and foremost refers to itself, and subsequently to other things. As is said in John 8:18: *I am one that gives testimony of myself, and the Father that sent me gives testimony of me.* Thus, faith is principally about God, and about other things in consequence of this.  

Reply Obj. 3: First truth, in so far as it appears in its proper form, is the object of the vision of heaven. But, in so far as it does not appear, it is the object of faith. So, although the object of both acts is the same thing in reality, it differs in intelligible aspect. The object thus formally different makes the species of the act different.  

Reply Obj. 4: In some sense light is the object of sight and in another sense not. For, since light is seen by our sight only if through reflection or in sonic other way it is united to a body having a surface, it is not called the essential object of sight. This is, rather, color, which is always in a body having a surface. *(Aristotle, *On Sense* 1.3, 439b11.)* However, in so far as nothing can be seen except by reason of light, light itself is said to be the first visible thing, as Ptolemy says. *(Ptolemy, *Optics*.)* Similarly, first truth is primarily and essentially the object of faith.  

Reply Obj. 5: The thing known in so far as it exists in itself outside the knower is said to be the object of knowledge, although knowledge of such a thing takes place only through that which arises from it in the knower. In this way, the color of a stone, which is the object of sight, is known only through its species in the eye. Accordingly, first truth, which is in itself simple, is the object of faith. But our understanding receives it in its own manner by means of the composition [of judgment]. Thus, our understanding, by giving assent as true to the composition which is made in judgment, tends toward first truth as toward its object. Thus, nothing prevents first truth from being the object of faith, although faith treats of propositions.  

Reply Obj. 6: The resurrection of the body and other things of this sort also pertain to first truth in so far as they are caused by divine power.  

Reply Obj. 7: Everything worthy of belief must belong primarily to first truth and, secondarily, to created things because God bears witness to them, as is evident from what has been said. Other things worthy of belief are not the object of the faith with which we are now dealing.  

Reply Obj. 8: The Creator is not the object of faith under the aspect of Creator, but under the aspect of first truth. Consequently, it is not necessary for creatures to be an essential object of faith. For it does not follow, from the fact that the knowledge of master and slave, as such, is the same, that whoever knows something about the master knows something about the slave.  

Reply Obj. 9: Although we are led to creatures by reason of first truth, through it we are led mainly to first truth itself, since it gives witness primarily about itself. So, in faith, first truth acts both as means and object.  

Reply Obj. 10: In the neighbor, charity loves only God. Therefore, it does not follow from this that the object of charity is anything other than the highest good.  

Reply Obj. 11: The representations through which faith looks at something are not the object of faith, but that through which faith tends toward its object.  

Reply Obj. 12: Although faith deals with a proposition in so far as we are concerned, it nevertheless deals with a simple truth in so far as there is question of the object to which we are led through faith.  

Reply Obj. 13: Although prophecy has for its subject matter created and temporal things, it has the uncreated reality for its end. For all the prophetic revelations, even those made about created things, are ordained to make us know God. Therefore, prophecy leads to faith as to its end. Nor is it necessary for faith and prophecy to have the same object or subject matter. And if at times faith and prophecy deal with the same thing, still they do not treat it under the same aspect. Thus, the ancients had prophecy and faith about the Passion of Christ. However, the prophecy had reference to that which was temporal in it, and faith to that which was eternal in it.  

Reply Obj. 14: Faith does not concern the passion except in so far as it is connected with eternal truth, as the passion is considered with reference to God. For, although the passion, considered in itself, is contingent, still, as it falls under the divine foreknowledge, and as faith and prophecy concern it, it has changeless truth.  

Reply Obj. 15: The subject of a proposition acts as matter for the whole proposition. So, although in such propositions, when we say that "God has suffered," only the subject denotes something uncreated, the whole proposition is said to have something uncreated as its subject matter. Thus, it does not deny that faith has first truth for its object.  

Reply Obj. 16: First truth is called the object of faith only in so far as faith concerns it. Nevertheless, it is not necessary that every proposition made about God be something to be believed, but only that to which divine truth bears witness. Similarly, mobile body is the subject of the philosophy of nature, yet not every proposition that can be formed about mobile body is subject to scientific knowledge, but only those which are proved from the principles of the philosophy of nature. Moreover, in faith the witness of first truth acts as a principle does in scientific demonstrations.
