# Article 3 — Whether faith is a virtue

Third, it is asked whether faith is a virtue?  *(Parallel texts: *ST* I-II.65.4; II-II.4.5; *III Sent,* d. 23, q. 2, a. 4, qa. 1; q. 3, a. 1, qa. 2; *On the Virtues*, q. 1, a. 7; *Commentary on Romans*, ch. 1, lect. 6.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it is not, for virtue is distinguished from knowledge. So, virtue and knowledge are classified in different genera, as is clear from the *Topics*. *(Aristotle, *Topics* 4.2, 121b24; 4.5.)* But faith is contained under the genus of knowledge. Therefore, it is not a virtue.  

Obj. 2: It was said that, as ignorance is a vice because it is caused by a neglect of knowledge, so faith is a virtue because it resides in the will of the believer. *(It is rightly: Augustine, *Epistulae,* letter 98, "Ad Consentium," n. 10 (PL 33:364); et *De praedestinatione,* ch. 5 (PL 44:968).)*  

*On the contrary*, the mere fact that something is the result of guilt does not make it possible to put guilt in its definition. Otherwise, punishment, as such, would have guilt in its definition. Therefore, ignorance cannot be called a vice because it arises from the vice of neglect. For the same reason, faith cannot be called a virtue because it is consequent upon the will.  

Obj. 3: Virtue is so called because of its relation to the good. For virtue is *that which makes its possessor good, and makes his work good*, as is said in the *Ethics*. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 2.5, 1106a15, 1106a22; 2.6, 1106b28.)* But the object of faith is the true, not the good. Therefore, faith is not a virtue.  

Obj. 4: It was said that the true which is the object of faith is the first truth, which is also the highest good, and, so, faith fulfills the definition of virtue.  

*On the contrary*, in the distinction of habits and acts we must consider the formal distinction of objects, not their material distinction. Otherwise, sight and hearing would be the same power because the same thing happens to be audible and visible. But, no matter how much the good and the true are identified in reality; formally, one aspect founds the concept of its truth and another of its goodness. Therefore, a habit which is directed toward the true, as such, is distinguished from that habit which is directed toward the good as such. Thus, faith is distinguished from virtue.  

Obj. 5: The mean and the extremes are in the same genus, as is clear from the Philosopher. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 10.9, 1057a18.)* But faith is a mean between scientific knowledge and opinion, for Hugh of St. Victor says *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments,* bk. 1, p. 10, ch. 2 (PL 176:330C).)* that faith is *a certainty of mind which is more than opinion and less than scientific knowledge*. But neither opinion nor science is a virtue. So, neither is faith.  

Obj. 6: The presence of the object does not destroy the habit of a virtue. But, when the object of faith, which is first truth, is present to our minds so that we see it, we will not have faith but vision. Therefore, faith is not a virtue.  

Obj. 7: *Virtue is the fullest development of a power,* as is said in *Heaven and Earth. *(Aristotle, *On Heaven and Earth* 1.11, 281a14; cf. Aquinas, *Commentary on Aristotle's On the Heavens,* bk. 1, lect. 25.)** But faith is not the fullest development of a human power, because it is capable of something fuller, plain sight. Therefore, faith is not a virtue.  

Obj. 8: According to Augustine, *(Augustine, *On the Good of Marriage,* ch. 21 (PL 40:390).)* through the virtues the acts of powers are made easier. Faith, however, does not make the act of understanding easier, but rather hinders it, because by it our understanding is made captive, as is said in the second Epistle to the Corinthians 10:5. Therefore, faith is not a virtue.  

Obj. 9: The Philosopher *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 1.20, 1103a4; 6.3-7, 1149b14–1141b33; cf. *ST* I-II.58.2, s.c.)* divides virtues into intellectual and moral. This division is made according to immediate differences, because the intellectual is that which is in the part which is essentially rational, and the moral is that which is in the part which is rational by participation. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 1.10, 1098a3 et ch. 20, 1103a2.)* There is no other sense in which we can understand rational; nor can human virtue be in any but the rational part taken in some sense. But faith is not a moral virtue, because, then, its subject matter would be actions and emotions. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 2.3, 1104b13; cf. *ST* I-II.59.4, ad 1.)* Nor is it an intellectual virtue, because it is not any of those five virtues which the Philosopher gives. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 6.3, 1139b16.)* For it is not wisdom, or understanding, or science, or art, or prudence. Therefore, faith is not a virtue at all.  

Obj. 10: That which belongs to a thing because of something extrinsic to it is not in that thing essentially, but accidentally. Faith, however, is not fittingly called a virtue except because of something else, as has been said, namely, because of the will. Therefore, to be a virtue belongs accidentally to faith; hence, faith cannot be classified as a species of virtue.  

Obj. 11: There is more perfect knowledge in prophecy than in faith. But prophecy is not classified as a virtue. Therefore, neither should faith be called a virtue.  

On the contrary (1), virtue is a disposition of something perfect to that which is best. *(Aristotle, *Physics* 7.3, 246b23.)* But this fits faith, for faith orders man to beatitude, which is that which is best. Therefore, faith is a virtue.  

Furthermore (2), every habit by which one is given strength to act and endurance to suffer is a virtue. But faith is of this nature, for *faith works by charity* (Gal 5:6). *(Cf. *ST* I-II.100.1, obj. 3; I-II.108.2, obj. 1; Augustine, *Tractates on the Gospel of John,* tract. 29, para. 6 (PL 25:1631).)* Faith also makes the faithful strong in resisting the devil, as is said in the first Epistle of Peter 5:9. Therefore, faith is a virtue.  

Furthermore (3), Hugh of St. Victor says *(It is actually Pseudo-Augustine, *De spiritu et anima,* ch. 20 (PL 40:794).)* that there are three *sacramental virtues by which we receive our initiation* [into the Church]: faith, hope, and charity. We conclude as before.  

I answer that everybody agrees that faith is a virtue. For a proof of this we should note that virtue by its very name means the completion of an active power. Now, there are two kinds of active powers, one whose action terminates in something performed outside the agent, as the action of the power of building terminates in the edifice; and the other, whose action does not terminate outside of the agent, but remains within him as sight remains within one who sees, as the Philosopher says. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 9.8, 1050a23.)* In these two kinds of powers completion is taken in different senses.  

Since acts of the first type of power are not in the maker, but in what is made, as the Philosopher says, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 9.8, 1050a30.)* the completion of the power is to be considered in reference to that which is done. Thus, the power of one who carries burdens is said to consist in this, that he carries a very heavy burden, as is evident from *Heaven and Earth;* *(Aristotle, *On Heaven and Earth* 1.25, 281a7.)* and the power of one who builds consists in this, that he makes a very good house. However, since the act of the other type of power remains in the agent and not in anything produced, the completion of that type of power is conceived according to its mode of acting, namely, that it act well and fittingly. And it is because of this that its act is called good. And so it is that in this type of power we call virtue that *which makes the work good*.  

But the philosopher considers one thing as final good and the theologian another. For the philosopher considers as final good that which has a proportion to the human powers and exists in the act of man himself. Thus, he says that happiness is an activity. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 1.19, 1102a5; cf. *ST* I-II.3.2, s.c.)* Therefore, according to the philosopher, a good act, whose principle is called a virtue, is said to be good without qualification in so far as it is in conformity with the potency as that which perfects it. Consequently, when the philosopher finds any habit which elicits such an act, he calls it a virtue, whether it be in the intellective part, as science, understanding of principles, and intellectual virtues of this sort, whose acts are the good of the power itself, namely, to consider the true; or whether it be in the affective part, as temperance, bravery, and the other moral virtues. But the theologian considers as the final good that which is beyond the capacity of nature, namely, everlasting life, as has been said. *(Above: a. 2.)* Thus, he does not consider the good in human acts without qualification, because he puts the end not in the acts themselves, but in the disposition to that good which he makes the end. He says that only that act is completely good which has a proximate relation to the final good, that is, an act which merits eternal life. He says that every such act is an act of virtue, and every habit properly eliciting such an act he calls a virtue.  

However, an act can be called meritorious only if it lies within the power of the agent. For it is necessary for one who merits to present something. Nor can he present something unless it is in some way his own, that is, from himself. Now, an act lies within our power, in so far as it belongs to our will, whether as elicited by the will, as to love and to wish, or as commanded by the will, as to walk and to talk. Hence, with reference to any such act, we can posit as a virtue that which elicits perfect acts of this type. As has been said above, *(Above: a. 1.)* there is assent in belief only by reason of the command of the will. Therefore, it depends on the will according to its very nature. It is for this reason that to believe can be meritorious, and that faith, which is the habit eliciting the act of believing, is a virtue for the theologian.  

Reply Obj. 1: Knowledge and science are not distinguished from virtue taken simply, but from moral virtue, which is more commonly called virtue.  

Reply Obj. 2: Although the fact that something is caused by a virtue or a vice is not enough to put virtue or vice in its definition, the fact that it can be commanded by a virtue or a vice is enough to make an act be the act of a vice or virtue.  

Reply Obj. 3: The good toward which a virtue gives an ordination should not be taken as the object of some act; rather, that good is the perfect act itself, which the virtue elicits. And, although the true differs from the good in its intelligible content, the act of considering the true is a good of the understanding, and to give assent to first truth on its own account is a good worthy of merit. Consequently, faith, which is ordained to this act, is called a virtue.  

Reply Obj. 4: The answer to the fourth difficulty is clear from the third response.  

Reply Obj. 5: Neither scientific knowledge nor opinion, but only faith, can be called a virtue in the sense in which we are now speaking of virtue. For faith is not a mean between science and opinion with reference to that which concerns the will, and it is according to this that it is classified as a virtue in the way we have mentioned. For in science and opinion there is no inclination because of the will, but only because of reason. If, however, we are talking about them with reference only to knowledge, neither opinion nor faith would be a virtue, since they do not have perfect knowledge. Only science has this.  

Reply Obj. 6: First truth is the proper object of faith only under the character of non-appearing, as is clear from the definition of the Apostle, *(Hebrews 11:1.)* where it is said that the proper object of faith is that which does not appear. Consequently, when first truth is present, it loses its character of object.  

Reply Obj. 7: Faith is said to be the fullest development of a power in so far as it adds to the power that which is needed to elicit a good and meritorious act. For a virtue really to be a virtue, however, it does not have to elicit the best act possible from that power, for in the same power there may be several virtues, one of which elicits an act more noble than another, as magnificence over liberality.  

Reply Obj. 8: In any two things which are ordained to each other the perfection of the lower is for it to be subject to the higher, as the concupiscible which is subject to reason. Because of this, the habit of a virtue is said to make it easy for the concupiscible power to act, not in the sense so that it makes it pursue concupiscible objects without restraint, but because it brings it perfectly under the dominion of reason. Similarly, the good of understanding itself is to be subject to the will which adheres to God. Thus, faith is said to help the understanding in so far as it makes it captive under such a will.  

Reply Obj. 9: Faith is not an intellectual or moral virtue, but a theological virtue. And, although the theological virtues have the same subject as moral and intellectual virtues, they have a different object. For the object of the theological virtues is the last end itself, whereas the object of the other virtues is the means to the end. Therefore, the theologians propose certain virtues which concern the end itself. But the philosophers do not do this, because the end of human life which the philosophers study does not transcend the power of nature. Hence, man's pursuit of that end is the result of a natural inclination, and to pursue that end he does not need to be elevated by any habits, as he does to pursue the end considered by the theologians, which transcends the power of nature.  

Reply Obj. 10: Faith is in the intellect only in so far as it is commanded by the will, as is clear from what has been said. *(Above: a. 1.)* Hence, although that which comes from the will can be said to be accidental to the intellect, it is still essential to faith. The same holds for the rational element, which is accidental to the concupiscible, but essential to temperance.  

Reply Obj. 11: Prophecy does not depend on the will of the prophet, as is said in the second Epistle of St. Peter 1:21. Faith, however, is to some extent dependent on the will of the believer. Therefore, prophecy cannot be called a virtue as faith can.
