# Article 5 — Whether charity is the form of faith

Fifth, it is asked whether charity is the form of faith?  *(Parallel texts: *ST* II-II.4.3; II-II.23.8; *In III Sent*., d. 23, q. 3, a. 1, qa. 1; *Disputed Questions on the Virtues*, q. 2, a. 3.)*  

Obj. 1: And it seems that it is not, for one of two things which are distinguished from each other as opposites cannot be the form of the other. But faith and charity arc distinguished from each other as opposites. Therefore, charity is not the form of faith.  

Obj. 2: It was said that they are distinguished from each other as opposites in so far as they are considered in themselves, but that charity is the form of faith in so far as they are directed to the one end which they merit by their acts.  

*On the contrary*, two of the causes are extrinsic, namely, agent and end; and two are intrinsic, form and matter. Now, two diverse things can have one common extrinsic principle, but they do not on this account have one common intrinsic principle. Therefore, we cannot conclude from the ordination of faith and charity to one end that charity is the form of faith.  

Obj. 3: It was said that charity is not an intrinsic but an extrinsic form, a kind of exemplary form.  

*On the contrary*, the facsimile takes its species from the exemplar. Hence, Hilary says: *(Hilary, *De synodis,* n. 13 (PL 10:490B); ad verbum profert *Summa fratris Alexandri,* part 1, n. 413, p. 603.)* *the image is not of a different species from the thing which is represented*. But faith does not take its species from charity. Therefore, charity cannot be the exemplary form of faith.  

Obj. 4: Every form is either substantial, or accidental, or exemplary. But charity is not the substantial form of faith, for, if it were, it would be an integral part of faith. Nor is it an accidental form, for faith thus would be more noble than charity, since the subject is more noble than the accident. Nor is it the exemplary form, because charity then would be able to exist without faith, since the exemplar can exist without the facsimile. Therefore, charity is not the form of faith.  

Obj. 5: Reward is proportionate to merit. But our reward consists principally in three gifts: vision, which takes the place of faith; possession, which takes the place of hope; and enjoyment, *(Cf. Bonaventure, *In IV Sent.,* d. 49, part 1, q. 5; Aquinas, *In I Sent.,* d. 1, q. 1, a. 1.)* which corresponds to charity. However, our reward consists mainly in vision, and, so, Augustine says: *vision is the whole reward*. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 1, cc. 8–9, 13 (PL 42:833).)* Therefore, merit and reward should both be attributed to faith. Therefore, in so far as they are ordained to acquiring merit, faith seems rather to be the form of charity, rather than charity that of faith.  

Obj. 6: For every subject of perfectibility there is one corresponding perfection. But the form of faith is grace. Therefore, charity is not its form, since charity is not the same as grace.  

Obj. 7: The Gloss on *Abraham begot Isaac* (Matt 1:2) says that faith begot hope, and hope, charity. *(*Glossa interlinearis,* at Matthew 1:2 (in *Glossa ordinaria* 5.33).)* This is taken as referring to acts, not to habits. Therefore, the act of charity depends on the act of faith. Now, a form does not depend on that of which it is the form, but the opposite. Therefore, charity is not the form of faith in so far as faith is ordained to a meritorious act.  

Obj. 8: Habits are distinguished through their objects. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.6, 415a18.)* But the objects of faith and charity are diverse, namely, the good and the true. Therefore, the habits are formally distinct, too. But every act is from a form. Therefore, the acts of those habits are diverse. Consequently, charity cannot be the form of faith even in its ordination to act.  

Obj. 9: Charity is the form of faith in so far as it forms faith; therefore, if it forms faith only through an ordination to its act, charity will not be the form of faith, but its act.  

Obj. 10: The Apostle says: *and now there remain faith, hope, and charity, these three* (1 Cor 13:13). Here, faith, hope, and charity are distinguished as opposed to each other. But he seems to be talking about formed faith, for formless faith is not considered to be a virtue, as will be said later. *(Below: a. 6.)* Therefore, formed faith is distinguished from charity, and, so, charity cannot be the form of faith.  

Obj. 11: For an act to be an act of virtue it must be morally good and voluntary. But reason is the principle of a morally good action, just as the will is the principle of a voluntary action. Therefore, something from reason is needed for an act of virtue, just as something from the will is needed. Therefore, just as charity, which is in the will, is the form of the virtues, so faith, which is in the reason, is also their form. Therefore, one should not be called the form of the other.  

Obj. 12: The same source gives a thing both life and its form. But spiritual life is attributed to faith, as is clear in Habakkuk 2:4: *but my just man lives by faith*. *(It is actually Hebrews 10:38; cf. Habakkuk 2:4.)* Therefore faith, rather than charity, should be said to form the virtues.  

Obj. 13: The act of faith is formed in one who has grace. But it is possible for the act of faith of such a man to have no relation to charity. Therefore, the act of faith can be formed without charity. So, charity does not seem to be the form of faith even with reference to its act.  

On the contrary (1), that without which faith is formless is the form of faith. But without charity faith is formless. Therefore, charity is the form of faith.  

Furthermore (2), Ambrose says: *charity is the mother of all the virtues and forms all of them.* *(Ambrose: see Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 3, d. 23, ch. 3; Pseudo-Ambrose, *Commentary on 1 Corinthians*, at 1 Cor 8:2 (PL 17:239A).)*  

Furthermore (3), a virtue is said to be formed in so far as it is able to elicit a meritorious act. But no act can be meritorious and acceptable to God unless it proceeds from love. Therefore, charity is the form of all the virtues.  

Furthermore (4), the form of a thing is that from which it gets its power to act. But faith gets its power to act from charity, for *faith . . . works by charity* (Gal 5:6). *(Cf. Gal 5:3.)* Therefore, charity is the form of faith.  

I answer that on this question there are different opinions. Some *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 27, ch. 6; cf. *ST* I-II.110.3.)* have said that grace itself is the form of faith and of the other virtues, but no other virtue is a form except in so far as, in their opinion, grace is essentially identified with virtue. But this cannot be. For, whether grace and virtue differ essentially or only conceptually, grace refers to the essence of the soul and virtue to a power. And, although the essence is the root of all the powers, all the powers do not proceed from the essence in the same way. For some powers are naturally prior to others and move them. Consequently, it is necessary for habits in the lower powers to be formed through the habits which are in the higher powers. Thus, the formation of the lower virtues should come from some higher virtue and not immediately from grace. Hence, it is commonly admitted that charity, as a sort of preeminent virtue, is the form of the other virtues, not only in so far as it is the same as grace *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 27, ch. 6.)* or is inseparably connected with it, but also from the very fact that it is charity. *(Cf. Albert the Great, *In III Sent.*, d. 27, a. 3; Aquinas, *In III Sent.*, d. 27, q. 2, a. 4, ad 3.)* And in this way, also, it is said to be the form of faith.  

We should understand the manner in which faith is formed by charity in the following way. For, whenever there are two principles of motion or action with an ordination to each other, that in the effect which is due to the higher agent is, as it were, formal, and that which is from the lower agent is, as it were, material. This is clear in both physical things and moral matters. For in the act of the nutritive power the power of the soul acts as first agent, and fiery heat acts as an instrumental agent, as is said in *On the Soul.* *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.4, 416a9–18; Averroes, *On the Soul,* bk. 2, comm. 40–41.)* And in flesh, which is produced by nutrition, the assembling of the parts, or dryness, or something of this sort, which comes from fiery heat, is material with reference to the species of flesh, which comes from the power of the soul. Similarly, when reason commands the lower powers, such as the irascible and concupiscible appetites, that in the habit of the concupiscible appetite which is from that appetite, namely, a certain inclination to some use of desirable things, is, as it were, material in temperance; whereas the order, which is of reason, and the rectitude, are formal. And the same holds in the other moral virtues. For this reason, some philosophers have called all virtues, sciences, as is said in the *Ethics.* *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 6.11, 1144b29.)* Since, therefore, faith is in the understanding in so far as the understanding is moved and commanded by the will, that which is from knowledge is material in faith, but its formation must be received from the will. Accordingly, since charity is a perfection of the will, faith is formed by charity. And for the same reason so are all the other virtues, in so far as they are studied by the theologian, that is, in so far as they are principles of meritorious acts. Now, no act can be meritorious unless it is voluntary, as has been said. *(Above: a. 3.)* And, so, it is evident that all the virtues with which the theologian is concerned are in the powers of the soul in so far as they are moved by the will.  

Reply Obj. 1: Charity is not called the form of faith in the way in which a form is part of an essence. For in that way it could not be distinguished from faith. It is called form in so far as faith acquires some perfection from charity. This is also the manner in which the higher elements in the universe are said to be the form of the lower elements, as air of water and water of earth, as is said in the *Physics.* *(Aristotle, *Physics* 4.8, 212b35.)*  

Reply Obj. 2: The answer to the second difficulty is clear from the first response.  

Reply Obj. 3: The manner in which charity is called form approximates the manner in which we call an exemplar a form. For what there is of perfection in faith is derived from charity, so that charity has essentially what faith and the other virtues have by participation.  

Reply Obj. 4: Since the habit of charity is not intrinsic to faith, it cannot be called either its substantial or its accidental form. But it can in a certain way be called an exemplary form. Nevertheless, it is not necessary that charity be able to exist without faith. For faith is not patterned on charity in so far as that which constitutes it faith is concerned, for in this way faith precedes charity in regard to the merely cognitional element of faith; rather, it is patterned on charity only in so far as faith is perfect. Hence, nothing prevents faith from being prior to charity in this regard, and charity from being unable to exist without it, while in some other respect charity may be the exemplar of faith which it always informs, in so far as faith is always present to it. But that which results in faith from charity is intrinsic to faith. We shall say later *(Below: a. 6.)* in what way this is accidental or substantial to faith.  

Reply Obj. 5: Will and understanding precede each other in different ways. For the understanding precedes the will in the process of reception, since, if something is to move the will, it must first be received into the understanding, as is clear in *On the Soul.* *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.15, 433b11.)* But, in causing motion or in acting, the will is prior, for every action or motion comes from a striving for a good. It is for this reason that the will, whose proper object is the good in its character as good, is said *(Pseudo-Anselm (Eadmer), *On Likenesses,* ch. 2 (PL 159:605C); as referred below, q. 22, a. 12, s.c. 1.)* to move all the lower powers. Reward, however, expresses the idea of reception, but merit expresses the idea of action. Hence it is that the whole reward is attributed mainly to the understanding, and vision is called "the whole reward," because the reward begins in the understanding and is brought to completion in the affections. Merit, however, is attributed to charity, because the will, which charity perfects, is the first mover in the performance of meritorious works.  

Reply Obj. 6: It is impossible for one thing to have many perfections in the same order. Now, grace is the first [that is, remote] perfection of the virtues, but charity is their proximate perfection.  

Reply Obj. 7: The act of faith which precedes charity is an imperfect act awaiting completion from charity. For faith is prior to charity in one respect and subsequent to it in another, as has been said.  

Reply Obj. 8: This difficulty proceeds correctly for the act of faith as it is in itself, but not as it is perfected by charity.  

Reply Obj. 9: When a higher power is perfect, some of its perfection is found in the lower power. And, so, when charity is in the will, its perfection in some manner flows over into the intellect. So, charity forms not only the act of faith, but faith itself.  

Reply Obj. 10: In those words the Apostle seems to be speaking of these habits without considering the character of virtue in them, but, rather, looking at them in so far as they are certain gifts and perfections. For this reason, in the same context he mentions prophecy and certain other charisms, which are not classified as virtues. Even if he is speaking of them in so far as they are virtues, the reasoning does not proceed correctly. For division into opposites sometimes takes place between things, one of which is the cause or perfection of the other. Thus, local motion is distinguished from other types of motion, although it is, nevertheless, the cause of the others. So, charity is distinguished from the other virtues, although it is their form.  

Reply Obj. 11: Reason can be considered in two ways. In one, it is taken in itself; in the other, in so far as it regulates the lower powers. In so far as it regulates the lower powers it is perfected through prudence. Thus it is that all the other moral virtues, by which the lower powers are perfected, are formed through prudence as by a proximate form. But faith perfects reason taken in itself, in so far as it considers the truth. Consequently, it does not belong to faith to form the lower virtues, but itself to be formed by charity, which forms the other virtues, even prudence itself, inasmuch as prudence itself, because of the end which is the object of charity, reasons about means to the end.  

Reply Obj. 12: Something common is especially attributed to a thing in two ways, either because it is most perfectly appropriate to it, as we attribute knowledge to the understanding; or because it is first found there, as life is attributed to the plant soul, as is clear in *On the Soul,* *(It is really Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.7, 415a23, as mentioned by Thomas below: q. 28, a. 1, ad 5.)* because life makes its first appearance in its acts. Spiritual life is, therefore, attributed to faith because spiritual life makes its first appearance in the act of faith, although its completion comes from charity, which for this reason is the form of the other virtues.  

Reply Obj. 13: In one who has charity there can be no act of virtue not formed by charity. For, either the act will be directed to the proper end, and this can be only through charity in one who has charity, or the act is not directed to the proper end, and so is not an act of virtue. Consequently, it is not possible for an act of faith to be formed by grace and not by charity, since grace has no ordination to act except through the mediation of charity.
