# Article 2 — What is faith

Second, it is asked what is faith? The Apostle says that faith is *the substance of things hoped for, the evidence [argumentum] of things that appear not* (Hebrews 11:1)*.*  *(Parallel texts: *ST* II-II.4.1; *In III Sent.,* d. 23, q. 2, a. 1; *Commentary on Hebrews,* ch. 11, lect. 1.)*  

Obj. 1: This seems to be incorrect, for no quality is a substance, but faith is a quality since it is a virtue, which is a good quality. *(Augustine, from Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 27, ch. 5; cf. Aquinas, *In II Sent.,* d. 27, a. 2.)* Therefore, faith is not a substance.  

Obj. 2: Spiritual being is added to natural being and is its perfection. For this reason it should be similar to it. But in man’s natural being the substance of his being is called the very essence of the soul, which is first act. But a power, which is the principle of second act, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.1, 412a10 et 22.)* is not called the essence. So, also, in spiritual being neither faith nor any virtue should be called the essence, for a virtue is a proximate principle of operation and so perfects the power. Grace should rather be called the essence, for spiritual being comes from grace as from its first act, and grace perfects the very essence of the soul.  

Obj. 3: It was said that faith is called substance because it is first among the virtues.  

*On the contrary*, virtues can be considered in three ways: with reference to their habits, to their objects, and to their powers. But with reference to their habits faith is not prior to the others, for this definition seems to give the definition of faith only in so far as it is formed (*formata*) . For it is only in this way that it is a foundation, as Augustine says. *(Augustine, *De fide et operibus,* ch. 16 (PL 40:215); *Enchiridion on Faith, Hope, and Charity,* ch. 117 (PL 40:288).)* All freely given habits, however, are infused at the same time. Likewise, faith seems to have no priority over the others with reference to their objects. For faith does not strive more for the true itself, which seems to be its proper object, than charity does for the highest good, or hope does for that which is hardest to attain, or for God’s greatest generosity. Nor is faith prior with reference to their powers, for every freely given virtue seems to look to the affections. Therefore, faith is in no way prior to the others, and so it should not be called the foundation or the substance of the others.  

Obj. 4: Things to be hoped for exist in us through charity rather than through faith. Therefore, this definition seems to fit charity better than faith.  

Obj. 5: Since hope is begotten of faith, as is clear from the Gloss, *(*Glossa interlinearis,* at Matthew 1:2, ibid.)* if one defines hope correctly, faith must be included in its definition. Hope, however, is included in the definition of the thing to be hoped for. Now, if the thing hoped for is included in the definition of faith, we shall have a circle in our definitions; *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.8, 72b25.)* but this is illogical because thus something would be prior to, and better known than, itself. For the thing itself would then be put in its own definition, since definitions are used in place of the names of things. Hence, in defining a thing there would be an unending process.  

Obj. 6: Different habits have different objects. But the theological virtues have the same thing for their end and object. Therefore, in the theological virtues there must be different ends for the different virtues. But the thing to be hoped for is the proper end of hope. Therefore, it should not be included in the definition of faith either as its end or its object.  

Obj. 7: Faith is brought to perfection through charity rather than through hope, and so it is said to be formed through charity. *(Below: a. 5.)* Therefore, in the definition of faith we should include the object of charity, which is the good or what is to be loved, rather than the object of hope, which is the thing to be hoped for.  

Obj. 8: Faith refers especially to the articles of faith. However, not all these articles, but only one or two, *the resurrection of the body *(Symbol. Ap. sec. ordinem Romanum.)* and life everlasting*, refer to things to be hoped for. Therefore, the thing to be hoped for should not be included in the definition of faith.  

Obj. 9: Argument (*argumentum*) is an act of reason. But faith pertains to those things which are above reason. Therefore, faith should not be called an argument.  

Obj. 10: In the soul there is a twofold movement, one from the soul and one to the soul. In the movement to the soul the principle is extrinsic; in that from the soul, it is intrinsic. Now, the same principle cannot be intrinsic and extrinsic. Therefore, the same principle of movement cannot be to the soul and from the soul. However, cognition takes place through a movement to the soul, but affection through a movement from the soul. Therefore, neither faith nor anything else can be the principle of affection and cognition. For this reason it is illogical to put in the definition of faith something pertaining to affection: *the substance of things hoped for*, and something pertaining to cognition: *evidence of things that appear not*.  

Obj. 11: One habit cannot belong to different powers. But the affective and the intellective are different powers. Since, then, faith is one habit, it cannot pertain to cognition and affection. We conclude as before.  

Obj. 12: Each habit has one act. Since, therefore, two acts are included in the definition of faith, namely, to make things hoped for subsist in us, in so far as it is called *the substance of things hoped for*, and to convince the mind, in so far as it is called *the evidence of things that appear not,* this does not seem a satisfactory description.  

Obj. 13: Understanding is prior to the affections. But that which is called *the substance of things hoped for* pertains to the affections, while that which is added in the words, *evidence of things that appear not,* belongs to understanding. Therefore, the parts of the aforesaid definition are not in their proper order.  

Obj. 14: Evidence is said to be that which convinces the mind to assent to something. *(Cf. Papias, *Vocabularium,* s.v. argumentum.)* But the mind is convinced to give assent to things because they become apparent to it. Therefore, the object, which is said to be *evidence of things that appear not*, seems to involve a contradiction.  

Obj. 15: Faith is a sort of knowledge. But all knowledge takes place in so far as something appears to the knower, for something appears in sensitive as well as in intellectual knowledge. Therefore, it is illogical to say that faith is “of things that appear not.”  

I answer that according to some, *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments,* bk. 1, part 10, ch. 2 (PL 176:327D, 330C); Alexander of Hales, *Summa fratris Alexandri,* part 3, n. 678, p. 1076; Albert the Great, *In III Sent*., d. 23, a. 18.)* when the Apostle gave this definition, he did not want to show what faith is, but what faith does. However, it seems that we should rather say that this description is a very complete definition. It is such, not in the sense that it is given according to the required form of a definition, but because in it there is sufficient mention of everything which is necessary for a definition of faith. For, sometimes, even when dealing with philosophers themselves, it is enough to mention the principles of syllogisms and definitions because, once they have them, it is a simple matter to reduce them to due form according to the rules of the art.  

This is clear from three considerations. First, from the fact that it mentions all the principles on which the nature of faith depends. For the state of the believer, as has been said above, *(Above: a. 1.)* is such that the intellect is determined to something through the will, and the will does nothing except in so far as it is moved by its object, which is the good to be sought for and its end. In view of this, faith needs a twofold principle, a first which is the good that moves the will, and a second which is that to which the understanding gives assent under the influence of the will. Man, however, has a twofold final good, which first moves the will as a final end. The first of these is proportionate to human nature since natural powers are capable of attaining it. This is the happiness about which the philosophers speak, either as contemplative, which consists in the act of wisdom, or active, which consists first of all in the act of prudence, and in the acts of the other moral virtues as they depend on prudence. The other is the good which is out of all proportion with man’s nature because his natural powers are not enough to attain to it either in thought or desire. It is promised to man only through the divine liberality: *the eye has not seen* (1 Cor 2:9). This is life everlasting. It is because of this good that the will is inclined to give assent to those things which it holds by faith. Thus John 6:40 reads: *everyone who sees the Son, and believes in him may have life everlasting.* But nothing can be directed to any end unless there pre-exists in it a certain proportion to the end, and it is from this that the desire of the end arises in it. This happens in so far as, in a certain sense, the end is made to exist inchoatively within it, because it desires nothing except in so far as it has some likeness of the end. This is why there is in human nature a certain initial participation of the good which is proportionate to that nature. For self-evident principles of demonstrations, which are seeds of the contemplation of wisdom, naturally preexist in that good, as do principles of natural law, which are seeds of the moral virtues. For this reason also, for man to be ordained to the good which is eternal life, there must be some initial participation of it in him to whom it is promised. However, eternal life consists in the full knowledge of God, as is clear from John 17:3: *now this is eternal life*. Consequently, we must have within us some initial participation of this supernatural knowledge. We have it through faith, which by reason of an infused light holds those things which are beyond our natural knowledge. Now, in composite things whose parts have an order, it is customary to call the first part the substance of the whole thing, for in that part there is a beginning of the whole. Examples of this are the foundation of a house and the hull of a ship. *(Example is from Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 5.1, 1013a4.)* In keeping with this, the Philosopher says: *if being were one whole, its first part would be substance*. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 12.1, 1069a19.)* Similarly, faith is called *the substance of things hoped for* (Heb 11:1), inasmuch as it is for us an initial participation of the eternal life for which we hope by reason of the divine promise. And in this way, mention is made of the relation between faith and the good which moves the will in its determination of the intellect. But the will, under the movement of this good, proposes as worthy of assent something which is not evident to the natural understanding. In this way it gives the understanding a determination to that which is not evident, the determination, namely, to assent to it. Therefore, just as the intelligible thing which is seen by the understanding determines the understanding, and for this reason is said to give conclusive evidence (*arguere*) to the mind; so also, something which is not evident to the understanding determines it and convinces (*arguere*) the mind because the will has accepted it as something to which assent should be given. For this reason another reading has proof *(Scil. ad Hebr. 11:1; cf. Augustine, *Tractates on the Gospel of John,* tract. 79, para. 1 (PL 35:1837); Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 3, d. 23, ch. 7.)* (*convictio*) [in place of evidence (*argumentum*)], for it convinces the intellect in the aforesaid manner. So, in the words, *evidence of things that appear not*, mention is made of the relation of faith to that to which the understanding assents.  

And, so, in the words, *of things that appear not*, we have the subject matter or object of faith; in *evidence* we have the act; and in *the substance of things to be hoped for* we have the ordination to the end. From the act we can understand the genus, that is, habit, which is known through the act, and the subject, that is, the mind. And nothing else is needed for the definition of a virtue. Consequently, from what has been said, we can establish a definition scientifically, and say: “faith is a habit of our mind, by which eternal life begins in us, and which makes our understanding assent to things which are not evident.”  

The second sign that this is a good definition is that through it we can distinguish faith from everything else. For by the words, *of those things that appear not*, faith is distinguished from scientific knowledge and understanding. By the word *evidence* it is distinguished both from opinion and doubt, in which the mind is not convinced, that is, is not determined to one thing. This also distinguishes it from all habits which are not cognitive. By the words, *substance of things to be hoped for*, it is distinguished from faith in the wide sense, namely, that by which we are said to believe that about which we have an opinion which we hold tenaciously, *(Aristotle, *Topics* 4.5, 126b18.)* or to believe on the testimony of some man. This also distinguishes it from prudence and from the other cognitive habits, which are either not ordained to things hoped for, or, if so ordained, do not include an initial participation in us of the things hoped for.  

The third sign that this is a good definition derives from this, that anyone wanting to define faith will have to include the whole definition or some part of it in other words. For, when Damascene says: *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith,* bk. 4, ch. 10 (PG 94:1128A); cf. Aquinas, *In III Sent.,* d. 23, q. 2, a. 1, ad 8.)* *faith is the substance [hypostasis] of those things that are hoped for, and the proof of those things which are not seen*, he obviously is saying the same thing as the Apostle. When he adds: *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith,* bk. 4, cc. 10–11 (PG 94:1128A))* *unshakeable and irreproachable hope of those things which have been announced to us by God, and of the fulfillment of our petitions*, he is explaining what had been included in the words, *substance of things to be hoped for.* For the things primarily to be hoped for are the rewards promised us by God, and, secondarily, whatever else we seek from God which is necessary for the former and about which our faith gives us certain hope. This hope cannot fail, and so it is called “unshakeable.” Nor can it be justly censured as vain, and so it is called “irreproachable.”  

Augustine’s statement: *faith is the virtue by which what is not seen is believed*; *(Augustine, *Tractates on the Gospel of John,* tract. 90, para. 9 (PL 35:1690); cf. *ST* II-II.58.1, ad 1; Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 3, d. 23, ch. 2; Augustine, *Questions on the Gospel,* bk. 2, q. 39 (PL 35:1352).)* and Damascene’s: *faith is a consent without inquiry* *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith,* bk. 4, cc. 11–12 (PG 94:1128D).)* and Hugh of St. Victor’s: *faith is a certainty of the mind about things absent which is more than opinion, but less than scientific knowledge*, *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments,* bk. 1, p. 10, ch. 2 (PL 176:330C); cf. Pseudo-Hugh of St. Victor, *Summa Sententiarum*, tract. 1.)* all mean the same as the Apostle’s words: *evidence of things that appear not*. Yet, it is said to be *less than scientific knowledge* because faith does not have vision as science does, although it has the same firm adherence. And yet it is said to be *more than opinion* because of the firmness of the assent. Thus, it is said to be *less than science* in so far as it refers to *things that appear not*, and *more than opinion* in so far as it refers to conviction (*argumentum*) . For the rest, what we have said is explanation enough. Moreover, when Dionysius says: *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names,* ch. 7, para. 4 (PG 3:872C); cf. ch. 12.)* *faith is the solid foundation of those who believe, establishing them in the truth, and the truth in them,* he is saying the same thing that the Apostle says in the words: *substance of things to be hoped for*. For knowledge of the truth is a thing to be hoped for, since *beatitude is nothing else than rejoicing over the truth*, as Augustine says. *(Augustine, *Confessions,* bk. 10, ch. 3 (PL 32:793); cf. *ST* II-II.4.1, s.c.)*  

Reply Obj. 1: Faith is called a substance, not because it is in the category of substance, but because it has a certain similarity to substance, namely, in so far as it is the initial participation and a kind of foundation of the whole spiritual life, just as substance is the foundation of all beings.  

Reply Obj. 2: The Apostle wanted to compare faith with those things which are outside of us, and not with what is within us. However, even though the essence of the soul in its natural being is that which is first and is substance with reference to the powers, habits, and everything consequent upon substance which inheres in it, nevertheless, the relation to external things is not primarily in the essence but in the powers. Likewise, this relation is not found in grace, but in virtue, and primarily in faith. Hence, it could not be said that grace was the substance of things to be hoped for, but that faith was.  

Reply Obj. 3: Faith precedes the other virtues, with reference to its object, the power in which it inheres, and its habit. With reference to its object it takes precedence, not because it has a stronger inclination toward its object than the other virtues toward theirs, but because it is natural for its object to cause movement before the objects of charity and the other virtues. This is evident because it is only through understanding that a good causes movement, as is said in *On the Soul,* *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.15, 433b11.)* but the true does not need any movement of appetite to set the understanding in motion. Consequently, the act of faith is naturally prior to the act of charity. Similarly, the habit is also prior, although, when faith is formed (*formata*), they are simultaneous. For the same reason the cognitive power is naturally prior to the affective. Now, faith belongs to the cognitive part, as is clear from the fact that its proper object is the true and not the good. But faith does in a certain sense have its fulfillment in the will, as will be shown later. *(Below: aa. 4 and 9.)*  

Reply Obj. 4: As is clear from what has already been said, the initial participation of things to be hoped for is not produced in us by means of charity, but by faith. Besides, charity is not evidence, so this description does not fit it at all.  

Reply Obj. 5: Since that good which inclines us to faith surpasses reason, it has no name. Therefore, the Apostle used the circumlocution, that which is to be hoped for, in its stead. This happens frequently in definitions.  

Reply Obj. 6: Every power has an end, which is its own good, but not every power refers to the character of end or good in so far as it is good. Only the will does this. Hence it is that the will moves all the other powers, because all movement begins from an intending of the end. Therefore, although the true is the end of faith, the true does not express the character of end. Consequently, not the true, but something pertaining to the affections ought to be taken as the end of faith.  

Reply Obj. 7: A thing to be loved can be present or absent, but a thing to be hoped for must be absent. Romans 8:24 says: *for what a man sees, why does he hope for?* Since, then, faith concerns what is absent, its end is more properly characterized by the thing to be hoped for than by the thing to be loved.  

Reply Obj. 8: An article [of faith] is the subject matter of faith. But the thing to be hoped for should be considered not as its subject matter, but as its end. Thus, the reasoning does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 9: Evidence (*argumentum*) has many meanings. *(Cf. Alexander of Hales, *Summa fratris Alexandri,* part 3, n. 678, p. 1077; Albert the Great, *In III Sent.,* d. 23, a. 18; Bonaventure, *In III Sent.,* d. 23, a. 1, q. 5.)* Sometimes it means the very act of reason proceeding from principles to conclusions. And since the whole force of the proof (*argumentum*) consists in the middle term, the middle term is therefore sometimes called the argument (*argumentum*). Thence it is that the preface of a book is sometimes called the argument, because in it there is a sort of brief foretaste of the whole work that follows. Again, since something is made to appear through evidence and the principle by which something appears is light, the light itself, by which it is known, can be called evidence. And faith is called evidence in these four ways. It is used in the first sense, in so far as reason assents to something because it was said by God. Thus, assent in the believer is caused by the authority of the speaker, since even in dialectical *(Cf. Peter of Spain, *Summulae logicales,* tract. 5, n. 42.)* matters there is a proof (*argumentum*) from authority. In the second way, faith is called the evidence of those things which do not appear, in so far as the faith of the faithful is a means of proving the existence of what does not appear, or in so far as the faith of our fathers is a means of making us believe, or in so far as faith in one article is the means to faith in another, as the Resurrection of Christ is to the general resurrection, as is clear from the first Epistle to the Corinthians 15:12. In the third way, faith is a brief foretaste of the knowledge which we shall have in the future. In the fourth way, faith is evidence with reference to the light of faith through which we know what is to be believed. Faith, however, is said to surpass reason, not because there is no act of reason in faith, but because reasoning about faith cannot lead to the sight of those things which are matters of faith.  

Reply Obj. 10: The act of faith consists essentially in knowledge, and there we find its formal or specific perfection. This is clear from its object, as has been said. But, with reference to its end, faith is perfected in the affections, because it is by reason of charity that it can merit its end. The beginning of faith, too, is in the affections, in so far as the will determines the intellect to assent to matters of faith. But that act of the will is an act neither of charity nor of hope, but of the appetite seeking a promised good. From this it is clear that faith is not in two powers as in its subjects.  

Reply Obj. 11: The answer to the eleventh difficulty is clear from the answer to the tenth.  

Reply Obj. 12: When we say *substance of things to be hoped for*, we are not dealing with the act of faith, but only with its relation to its end. The act is indicated by the reference to the object, when we say *evidence of things that appear not*.  

Reply Obj. 13: That to which the understanding gives assent does not move the understanding by its own power, but by the influence of the will. As a result, the good which moves the affective part has the role of first mover in the act of faith, but that to which the understanding gives assent is like a mover which is moved. Therefore, in the definition of faith we first give its reference to the good of the affections before the reference to its proper object.  

Reply Obj. 14: Faith does not convince the mind or satisfy (*arguere*) it so as to assent because of the evidence of the thing, but because of the influence of the will, as was said. Therefore, the reasoning does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 15: Knowledge can have two meanings: sight or assent. When it refers to sight, it is distinguished from faith. Thus, Gregory says: *things seen are the object not of faith, but of knowledge*. *(Gregory, *Homilies on the Gospels,* bk. 2, hom. 26 (PL 76:1202A); cf. Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Hebrews*, at Heb 11:1 (PL 192:488B).)* According to Augustine, *(Augustine, *Epistulae,* letter 147, "To Paulina" (*De vivendo Deum*), cc. 2–3 (PL 33:599).)* those things *which are present to the senses or the understanding* are said to be seen. But those things are said to be present to the understanding which are not beyond its capacity. But, in so far as there is certainty of assent, faith is knowledge, and as such can be called certain knowledge and sight. This appears in the first Epistle to the Corinthians 13:12: *we see now through a glass in a dark manner.* And this is what Augustine says: *(Augustine, *Epistulae,* letter 147, "To Paulina" (*De vivendo Deum*), cc. 2–3 (PL 33:600).)* *if it is not unfitting to say that we know that also which we believe to be most certain, it follows from this that it is correct to say that we see with our minds the things which we believe, even though they are not present to our senses.*
