# Article 2 — Whether higher and lower reason are different powers

Second, it is asked whether higher and lower reason are different powers? *(Parallel texts: *In Sent. II,* d. 24, q. 2, a. 2; *I Pars*, q. 79, a. 9; *ST* I.79.9.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that they are, for as Augustine says, *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, cc. 4 and 7 (PL 42:1000).)* the image of the Trinity is in the higher part of reason, but not in the lower. But the image of God in the soul is made up of the three powers. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 14, ch. 7 (PL 42:1043).)* Therefore, lower reason does not belong to the same power or powers as higher reason. Thus, they seem to be different powers.  

Obj. 2: Since a part is taken with relation to the whole, it is in the same genus as the whole. But the soul is called only a potential (*potentialis*) whole. *(Cf. *ST* I.76.8.)* Therefore, the different parts of soul are different powers (*potentiae*) . But higher and lower reason are given by Augustine as different parts of reason. *(Ex Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 24, ch. 7; Peter Lombard *Gloss on I Corinthians,* bk. 6 (PL 191:1634B); cf. Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 3–4, 7, 14 (PL 42:1005).)* Therefore, they are different powers.  

Obj. 3: Everything eternal is necessary and everything temporal and subject to change is contingent, as appears from the Philosopher. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 9.9, 1050b6; bk. 2.)* But the Philosopher calls scientific the part of the soul which deals with necessary things, and *reasoning,* or *conjectural,* the part which deals with contingent things. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 6.1, 1139a12; 6.4.)* Therefore, since, according to Augustine, *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 7, ch. 7 (PL 42:1005).)* higher reason embraces eternal things and lower reason administers temporal and perishable things, it seems that the *reasoning* is the same as lower reason and the scientific is the same as higher reason. But the *scientific* and *reasoning* are different powers, as the Philosopher also clearly shows. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 6.1, 1139a8; 6.4.)* Therefore, higher and lower reason are different powers.  

Obj. 4: The Philosopher says that we must distinguish different powers of the soul for those things which are generically different, since every power of the soul which is limited to some genus is limited to it because of some likeness. *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 6.1, 1139a8.)* Thus, the very diversity of objects according to genus bears witness to diversity of powers. But that which is eternal and that which is corruptible are entirely different generically, since corruptible and incorruptible do not belong to the same genus, as is said in the *Metaphysics.* *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 10.12, 1058b28.)* Therefore, higher reason, whose object is eternal things is a different power from lower reason, which has perishable thing for its material object.  

Obj. 5: Powers are distinguished through acts, and acts through objects. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.6, 415a18; cf. *In I Sent.*, d. 48, a. 2, obj. 2; *In II Sent.,* d. 38, a. 4, obj. 1; *potentiae per actus*: Aristotle as referred by Aquinas, *In II Sent.*, d. 24, q. 1, a. 2, obj. 3; *In IV Sent.,* d. 18, q. 1, a. 1, qa. 2.)* But truth to be contemplated is a different object from good to be done. Therefore, higher reason, which contemplates truth, is a different power from lower reason, which is occupied with the good.  

Obj. 6: That which is not one in itself is much less one when compared with something else. But higher reason is not one power, but several, since the image which consists of the three powers exists in it. Therefore, it cannot be said that lower and higher reason are the one power.  

Obj. 7: Reason is more simple than sense. However, in sense we do not find that the same power has different functions. Therefore, in the intellective part one power is much less able to have different functions. But higher and lower reason *are double in their functions*, as Augustine says. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 4 (PL 42:1000).)* Therefore, they are different powers.  

Obj. 8: Whenever things which are not reduced to the same principle are attributed to the soul, we must assign different powers in the soul according to this difference. Thus, imagination is distinguished from sense according to reception and retention. But the eternal and the corruptible cannot be reduced to the same principle. For, as is proved the *Metaphysics,* *(It is actually Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 12.1–8, 1069a18–1073b17.)* the proximate principles for corruptible and incorruptible things are not the same. Therefore, they should not be attributed to the same power of the soul. Thus, higher and lower reason are different powers.  

Obj. 9: Augustine says *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 12 (PL 42:1007); cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 24, cc. 6–7.)* that through the three that co-operated in man’s sin—man, woman, and serpent—three things in us are indicated, namely, higher and lower reason and sensuality. But sensuality is a different power from lower reason. Therefore, lower reason, too, is different from higher reason.  

Obj. 10: One power cannot at the same time sin and not sin. But, sometimes, lower reason sins when higher reason does not, as is clear from Augustine. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 12 (PL 42:1007); cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 24, cc. 6–7.)* Therefore, lower reason and higher reason are not one power.  

Obj. 11: Different perfections belong to different subjects of perfection, since a proper act requires a proper power. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.4, 414a25; cf. Aquinas, *In II Sent.,* d. 12, a. 1, obj. 1.)* But habits of the soul are perfections of its powers. Therefore, different habits belong to different powers. But, according to Augustine, *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 14 (PL 42:1009); cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 24, ch. 5.)* higher reason is assigned for wisdom and lower reason for scientific knowledge, and these two are different habits. Therefore, higher and lower reason are different powers.  

Obj. 12: Every power is perfected through its act. But diversity of acts leads to or manifests diversity of powers. Therefore, wherever there is diversity of acts, we should conclude to diversity of powers. But higher and lower reason have different acts, since *they are double in their functions,* as Augustine says. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 4 (PL 42:1000).)* Therefore, they are different powers.  

Obj. 13: Higher and lower reason differ more than the agent and the potential intellect, since we see that the act of the agent and the potential intellect concern the same intelligible thing. But, as has been said, *(Above: arg. 7, 8, and 12.)* the acts of higher and lower reason do not concern the same thing, but different things. However, the agent and the potential intellect are different powers. Therefore, higher and lower reason are, too.  

Obj. 14: Everything that is drawn from something differs from it, for nothing is its own cause. *(Cf. Alan of Lille, *De arte seu articulis catholiae fidei,* bk. 1, rule 8 (PL 210:600A).)* But lower reason is drawn from higher reason, as Augustine says. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 4 (PL 42:1000).)* Therefore, it is a different power from higher reason.  

Obj. 15: Nothing is moved by itself, as is proved in the *Physics.* *(Aristotle, *Physics* 7.1, 241b24.)* But higher reason moves lower reason in so far as it directs and governs it. Therefore, higher and lower reason are different powers.  

On the contrary (1), different powers of the soul are different things. But higher and lower reason are not different things. Consequently, Augustine says: *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 4 (PL 42:1000).)* *when we discuss the nature of the human mind, we are talking about one thing; and we divide it into the two which we have mentioned only by reason of its functions.* Therefore, higher and lower reason are not different powers.  

Furthermore (2), the more immaterial a power is, the more it can extend to many things. *(Cf. *Liber de causis,* prop. and comm. 10 [9]; cf. *ST* II-II.45.3, ad 1; Adam Pulchre-Mulieris, *De intelligentiis,* prop. 11.1.)* But reason is more immaterial than sense. Yet, by the same sensitive power, sight, for example, we discern eternal things, either incorruptible or perpetual, namely the heavenly bodies, and corruptible things, as these lower things around us. *(Aristotle, *De caelo* 1.6, 270a12.)* Therefore, it is the same power of reason which contemplates eternal things and administers temporal things.  

I answer that before we can explain this question we have to know two things: how powers are distinguished, and how higher and lower reason differ. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.6, 415a18.)* From these two we will be able to clarify the third point, which is the subject of our present inquiry, namely, whether higher and lower reason are one power or different powers.  

We must bear in mind that diversity of powers is determined according to acts and objects. However, some *(Non invenimus.)* say that this is to be understood in the sense that diversity of acts and objects is only a sign of diversity of powers and not its cause. And others *(Non invenimus.)* say that diversity of objects is the cause of diversity of powers in passive powers, but not in active powers. But, if we study the matter carefully, we find that in both types of powers acts and objects are not only signs of diversity, but in some way causes of it. For every thing which has existence only because of some end has its manner determined for it from the end to which it is ordained. Thus, a saw has this kind of form and this kind of matter in order to be suitable for its end, which is to cut. But every power of the soul, whether active or passive, is ordained to act as to its end, as is clear in the *Metaphysics.* *(Aristote, *Metaphysics* 9.1; 9.8, 1050a7.)* Hence, every power has a definite manner and species by reason of which it can be suitable for such an act. Therefore, powers are diversified because the diversity of acts required different principles from which to elicit acts. Moreover, since object is related to act as its term, and acts are specified by their terms, as is plain in the *Physics,* *(Aristotle, *Physics* 5.1, 224b7.)* acts must also be distinguished according to their objects. Therefore diversity of objects brings about diversity of powers.  

Diversity of objects, however, can be regarded in two ways: according to the nature of things and according to the diverse intelligible character of the objects. Diversity according to the nature of things appears in color and taste; diversity according to intelligible character of object, in the good and the true. Moreover, since powers which are acts of definite organs cannot extend beyond the disposition of their organs (for one and the same physical organ cannot be suitable for knowledge of all natures), it is necessary that powers which are attached to organs be limited to certain natures, that is, to physical natures. *(Cf. Aquinas, *In III Sent.,* d. 15, q. 2, a. 1, qa. 2, ad 2, where, using the same words, he adds: *ut quidam dicunt*; Albert the Great, *In III Sent.,* d. 15, a. 3.)* For activity which is exercised through a physical organ cannot go beyond physical nature. However, since there is something in corporeal nature in which all bodies agree, and something in which different bodies are diversified, it will be possible to make one power attached to the body suitable for all bodies according to that which they have in common. Thus, there is imagination for all bodies in so far as they share in the character of quantity, figure, and the things which follow on these. Hence, it extends not only to physical objects, but also to mathematical objects. Similarly, there is common sense in so far as in all the physical bodies, to which alone it extends, there is a force which is active and productive of change [in the sense]. Some powers, however, are adapted to those aspects in which bodies are diversified by reason of a difference in the mode of producing change [in the sense]. Thus, sight relates to color, hearing to sound, and so on for the other senses. From the fact that the sensitive part of the soul uses an organ in its activity two things follow: first, a power referring to an object common to all beings cannot be attributed to it, for this would immediately transcend physical reality; second, it is possible to find in the sensitive soul powers which differ according to the different nature of the objects because of the disposition of the organ, which can be suited to this or that nature.  

But the part of the soul which does not use a physical organ in its activity does not remain limited, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul,* 3.7, 429a26; *On the Soul,* 3.7, 429a24.)* but is in a sense infinite, in so far as it is immaterial. Therefore, its power extends to an object common to all beings. Hence, the object of understanding is said to be “something” (*quid*), *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.6, 430b28.)* which is found in all classes of beings. For this reason, the Philosopher says: *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.5, 430a14; cf. *ST* I.79.3, s.c. 1.)* *understanding is that by which one does all things and by which one becomes all things*. Consequently, it is impossible to distinguish different powers in the intellective part according to different natures of the objects. We can do so only according to the different character of the object, that is to say, in so far as the act of the soul is directed to one and the same thing according to different relations at different times. Thus, goodness and truth in the intellective part distinguish understanding and will. For understanding is directed to intelligible truth as to a form, since it must be informed by that which is understood, and [the will] is directed to goodness as to an end. For this reason, the Philosopher says *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 6.4, 1027b25.)* that truth is in the mind and good in things, since form is inside and end is outside. Moreover, form and end do not perfect a thing for the same reason. Thus, goodness and truth do not have the same character of object. It is in this way, too, that the understanding is divided into agent and potential intellect. For something is not an object for the same reason when it is in act and when it is in potency, or when it acts or is acted upon. For what is actually intelligible is the object of potential intellect and, as it were, acts upon it so that by the actually intelligible it proceeds from potency to act. But the potentially intelligible is the object of agent intellect, in so far as by reason of the agent intellect it becomes actually intelligible. Therefore, it is clear how powers can be distinguished in the intellective part.  

And higher and lower reason are distinguished in this way. There are certain natures higher than the rational soul, and certain natures lower. But, since everything that is understood is understood in the manner of the one understanding, *(Cf. *Book of Causes*, comm. 10 [9]; Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 1 (PG 3:693B); *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 12, para. 2 (PG 3:293A); Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 4 (PL 63:848C).)* in the rational soul the act of understanding things above the soul is lower than the things understood; but for things beneath the soul there is in the soul an act of understanding which is higher than the things themselves, since the things have a more noble existence in the soul than they do in themselves. *(*Book of Causes*, prop. 8 [7].)* Thus, the soul has a different relation to both types of things, and from this the different functions are derived. For it is called higher reason in its reference to higher natures, either as contemplating their nature and truth in themselves, or as receiving from them intelligible character and a kind of model for activity. It is called lower reason in so far as it is directed to lower things either to perceive them through contemplation or to manage them through activity. *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 24, ch. 5; cf. Aquinas, *In II Sent.*, d. 24, q. 2, a. 2; Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 7 (PL 42:1005).)* Both types of nature, however, the higher and the lower, are perceived by the human soul in their common character of intelligible, the higher in so far as it is immaterial in itself, and the lower in so far as it is divested of matter through the activity of the soul. *(Vocabulary of Avicenna, *On the Soul,* bk. 2, ch. 2.)* From this it is clear that higher and lower reason are not different powers, but one and the same power which is related differently to different things.  

Reply Obj. 1: As we have said in the question on the mind, *(Above: q. 10, a. 3 and 7.)* we see that the image of the Trinity in the soul is in the powers as in its root, but in its fullness it is in the acts of the powers. It is in this latter respect that the image is said to belong to higher and not to lower reason.  

Reply Obj. 2: A part of a power does not always denote a distinct power, but, sometimes, a part of a power is taken according to part of the objects in so far as the virtual division of quantity is considered. *(Cf. Augustine, *On the Size of the Soul,* ch. 3 (PL 32:1037).)* Thus, if someone can carry one hundred pounds, one who can carry only fifty pounds is said to have part of that power, although the power is specifically the same. *(Aristotle, *On the Heavens* 1.25, 281a7.)* It is in this sense that higher and lower parts are called parts of reason in so far as they are directed to part of the objects to which reason, as the term is generally used, refers.  

Reply Obj. 3: The scientific and the reasoning or conjectural parts are not the same as higher and lower reason, since we can have necessary considerations, which belong to the scientific, about lower natures with which lower reason is concerned; otherwise, physics and metaphysics would not be sciences. In the same way, higher reason also can in some way turn its attention to human acts, which depend on free will, and so are contingent; otherwise, sin, which occurs in such matters, would not be attributed to higher reason. Thus, higher reason is not completely distinct from the reasoning or conjectural part. But the scientific part and the reasoning part are different powers because they are distinguished in relation to the nature of the intelligible object. For, since the act of any power does not extend beyond the scope of its object, every activity that cannot be reduced to the same formality of its object must belong to another power, which has another characteristic object. Now, the object of understanding is “something” (*quid*) as is said in *On the Soul.* *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.6, 430b28.)* For this reason, the activity of understanding extends as far as the scope of the quiddity (*quod quid est*) of this “something” can extend. It is through this action that one at first knows principles themselves immediately, and from knowledge of these principles, by reasoning further, one arrives at knowledge of conclusions. This power, which is naturally ordained to analyze these conclusions into the quiddity (*quod quid est*), the Philosopher calls scientific. However, there are some things in which it is impossible to perform such an analysis and to arrive at the quiddity, because of the uncertainty of their existence. This is the case with contingent things, in so far as they are contingent. Hence, these are not known through their quiddity, which is the proper object of understanding, but in another way, namely, through a kind of conjecture about those things concerning which we cannot have certitude. For this, then, a different power is needed. And, since this faculty cannot bring the inquiry of reason to its term, as it were, to rest, but stays with the investigation, as it were, in motion, and attains no more than opinion about the objects of its inquiry, this power is, therefore, called the reasoning or the conjectural power from the term of its activity. But higher and lower reason are distinguished according to natures themselves and, therefore, are not different powers as the scientific and the conjectural are.  

Reply Obj. 4: The objects of the scientific and the reasoning parts are generically different by reason of the proper class of objects of knowledge, since they are known according to different intelligible characters. But eternal and temporal things differ in natural genus and not in their character of object of knowledge, according to which we must look for likeness between faculty and object.  

Reply Obj. 5: Truth, which is the object of contemplation, and goodness, which is the object of activity, belong to different faculties, the understanding and the will. But higher and lower reason are not distinguished in this way, for both can be speculative and active, although by reason of different things, as has been shown above. Consequently, the conclusion does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 6: Nothing prevents that which contains many things from being one with something else which contains many things if both contain the same things. Thus, this heap and this collection of stones are one and the same thing. In this way, higher and lower reason are the same faculty, although both in a sense contain several powers, since both contain the same powers. Moreover, higher reason is not said to include several powers in the sense that the power of reason itself is divided into different powers, but in so far as the will is included in the understanding. This does not mean that the will and the understanding are one faculty, but that the will is set in motion by the perception of the understanding.  

Reply Obj. 7: Even in the sensitive part there is one power which has different functions, as the imagination, whose function it is to retain those things which have been received from the senses and represent them again to understanding. *(Cf. *Liber de causis,* prop. 10 [9]; S*T* II-II.45.3, ad 1; Adam Pulchre-Mulieris, *De intelligentiis,* prop. 9.1.)* Accordingly, since the more immaterial a power is, the more things it can extend to, there is nothing to prevent one and the same power from having diverse functions in the intellective part, but not in the sensitive part.  

Reply Obj. 8: Although the eternal and temporal are not reduced to the same proximate principle, knowledge of the eternal and of the temporal are reduced to the same principle since both are grasped according to one character of immateriality by one who understands.  

Reply Obj. 9: According to Augustine, *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 12 (PL 42:1007); cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 24, cc. 6–7.)* as man and woman, between whom there was the carnal marriage bond, belonged to human nature and the serpent did not, so lower reason, as woman, belongs to the nature of higher reason, whereas sensuality, as the serpent, does not.  

Reply Obj. 10: Since sin is an act, properly speaking, it does not belong to either higher or lower reason, but to man according to the former or latter. And, if one power is related to different things, there is nothing inconsistent in having sin according to one relation and not according to the other. Thus, although several habits are in one power, it happens that one sins according to the act of one habit and not according to the act of another, for example, if the same man is grammarian and geometer, and he makes a statement containing truth about lines and also a solecism. *(Cf. Peter of Spain, *Summulae logicales*, tract. 7, n. 2.)*  

Reply Obj. 11: When a perfection brings the perfectible thing to completion according to its full capacity, it is impossible for one perfectible thing to have several perfections; in the same order. Therefore, matter cannot receive perfection from two substantial forms at the same time, because one matter has a capacity for only one substantial nature. However, the case is different with accidental forms, which do not give perfection to their objects according to their full potency. Consequently, it is possible for one perfectible thing to have many accidents. Therefore, there can be many habits of one power, since habits are accidental perfections of powers, for they are superadded to the nature of the complete power.  

Reply Obj. 12: As Avicenna says, *(It is actually: Avicenna, *On the Soul*, bk. 1, ch. 4.)* diversity of act sometimes indicates diversity of powers and sometimes does not. For there can be diversity in the acts of the soul in five ways. In one, it is according to strength and weakness, as to conjecture and to believe. In the second, it is according to swiftness and slowness, as to run and to be put in motion. In the third, it is according to habit and privation, as to be at rest and to be moved. In the fourth, it is according to relation to opposites of the same genus, as to sense white and to sense black. It is in the fifth when the acts belong to different genera, as to perceive and to move, or to sense sound and to sense color. Accordingly, diversity of the first and second type does not manifest diversity of power, for it thus would be necessary to have as many distinct powers of soul as there are grades of strength or weakness and swiftness or slowness in acts. Similarly, diversity of the third and fourth type does not indicate diversity of power, since it belongs to the same power to occupy itself with both opposites. Hence, only diversity of the fifth type manifests diversity of power, so that we say that acts are generically different which do not agree in the character of their object. The diversity of acts of higher and lower reason does not display diversity of power in this way, as is clear from what has been said.  

Reply Obj. 13: Agent and potential intellect differ more than higher and lower reason, since agent and potential intellect refer to objects formally different, although not materially different. For they refer to a different character of object, although both can be found in the same intelligible thing. For one and the same thing can first be intelligible in potency and then intelligible in act. But higher and lower reason refer to objects materially different, but not formally different. For they refer to different natures according to one character of object, as is clear from what has been said. But formal diversity is greater than material diversity. Therefore, the conclusion does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 14: Lower reason is said to be drawn from higher reason because of the things which lower reason perceives, for these are drawn from those which higher reason perceives. For lower natures are drawn from higher natures. Consequently, nothing prevents higher and lower reason from being the same power. Similarly, we see that it belongs to the same power to study the principles of a subalternating science and the principles of a subalternate science, although the latter are drawn from the former.  

Reply Obj. 15: Higher reason is said to move lower reason to this extent, that lower natures must be ruled according to higher natures, just as a subalternate science is ruled by the subalternating science.
