# Article 4 — Whether a false conscience can bind

Fourth, it is asked whether a false conscience can bind? *(Parallel texts: Aquinas, *In II Sent*., d. 39, q. 3, a. 3; *ST* I-II.19.5; *Quodlibet*, bk. 3, q. 12, a. 2; bk. 8, q. 6, a. 3; bk. 9, q. 7, a. 2; *Commentary on Romans*, ch. 14, lect. 2; *Commentary on Galatians*, ch. 5, lect. 1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it does not, for Augustine says *(Augustine, *Contra Faustum*, bk. 22, ch. 27 (PL 42:418); cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 35, ch. 1.)* that sin is a word, deed, or desire contrary to the law of God. Therefore, nothing binds under pain of sin except God’s law. But a false conscience is not in accordance with God’s law. Therefore, it does not bind under pain of sin.  

Obj. 2: On Romans (13:1), *let every soul be subject to higher powers*, Augustine says *(Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Romans*, at Romans 13:1 (PL 191:1505B), from Augustine, *Sermones ad populum,* bk. 62, ch. 8 (PL 38:421).)* that we should not obey a lower power contrary to the commandment of a higher power, just as we should not obey the proconsul if his order is contrary to that of the emperor. But a false conscience is inferior to God. Therefore, when conscience gives orders contrary to the commands of God, the command of a mistaken conscience seems to impose no obligation whatever.  

Obj. 3: According to Ambrose, *(Ambrose, *On Paradise*, ch. 8 (PL 14:309C).)* sin is *a transgression of the divine law and disobedience to the heavenly commands*. Therefore, whoever disobeys the divine law sins. But a false conscience makes a man disobey the divine power when, for instance, his conscience tells him to do something which is forbidden by the divine law. Therefore, a false conscience leads one into sin if he follows it, rather than binds him under pain of sin if he does not follow it.  

Obj. 4: According to the law, *(*Decretals of Gregory IX,* bk. 5, tit. 39, ch. 44 (ed. Friedberg II, 908).)* if a man’s conscience tells him that he and his wife are related within the forbidden degrees of kindred, and that conscience is probable, then he must follow it against a precept of the Church, even if an excommunication is attached to the precept. However, if his conscience is not probable, he is not bound to follow it, but should obey the Church. But a false conscience, especially about things which are intrinsically evil, has no probability at all. Therefore, such a conscience does not bind.  

Obj. 5: God is more merciful than a temporal lord. But a temporal lord does not accuse a man of sin in something which he did by mistake. Therefore, in God’s sight a man is much less obliged under pain of sin by a mistaken conscience.  

Obj. 6: It was said that a false conscience binds with reference to indifferent things, but not with reference to things which are intrinsically evil.  

*On the contrary*, a mistaken conscience is said not to bind when dealing with things which are intrinsically evil because the dictate of natural reason opposes it. But natural reason in like manner opposes the false conscience which is mistaken about indifferent things. Therefore, that, too, does not bind.  

Obj. 7: An indifferent action may be accepted or rejected. But there is no necessary obligation *(Aristotle, *On Interpretation*, ch. 9, 18b8.)* to do or omit an action which may be accepted or rejected. Therefore, conscience imposes no necessary obligation to indifferent actions.  

Obj. 8: If from a false conscience one acts contrary to the law of God, he is not excused from sin. Accordingly, if one who acted against his conscience, even when it was mistaken, were to sin, it would follow that, whether he acted according to his false conscience or not, he would sin. Therefore, he would be so perplexed *(Cf. William of Auxerre, *Summa aurea,* bk. 3, ch. 1; Alexander of Hales, *Summa fratris Alexandri,* bk. 2, part 2, n. 392, p. 391.)* that it would be impossible for him to avoid sin. But this seems impossible, because, according to Augustine: *(Augustine, *Concerning Two Souls, Against the Manichaeans*, ch. 10 (PL 42:103); ch. 11 (PL 42:105); *On Free Will,* bk. 3, ch. 18 (PL 32:1295); cf. *ST* I-II*.*109.8, obj. 1.)* *no one sins in that which he cannot avoid*. Therefore, it is impossible for such a false conscience to bind.  

Obj. 9: Every sin belongs to some genus of sin. But, if conscience tells one that he should fornicate, to abstain from fornication cannot be classified in any genus of sin. Therefore, he would not sin in thus acting contrary to his conscience. Therefore, such a conscience does not bind.  

On the contrary (1), on Romans 14:23, *for all that is not of faith is sin*, the Gloss says: *(Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Romans*, at Romans 14:23 (PL 191:1519D).)* *that is, it is a sin in conscience, even if it is good in itself.* But conscience which forbids that which is good in itself is false. Therefore, such a conscience binds.  

Furthermore (2), observance of the legal prescriptions of the Mosaic law in the new dispensation of grace was not indifferent but intrinsically evil. Hence, Galatians 5:2 says: *if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.* Nevertheless, conscience prescribing the observance of circumcision was binding. Hence, in the same Epistle we read: *and I testify again to every man circumcising himself,* *(Aquinas, *ST* III.62.6, obj. 3.)* *that he is a debtor to do the whole law* (Gal 5:3)*.* Therefore, a false conscience binds in things intrinsically evil.  

Furthermore (3), sin is principally in the will. But whoever decides to transgress a divine commandment has an evil will. Therefore, he sins. Whoever believes that something is a command and decides to violate it wills to break the law. Therefore, he sins. Moreover, one who has a false conscience, whether in things intrinsically evil or in anything at all, believes that what is opposed to his conscience is contrary to the law of God. Therefore, if he decides to do that, he decides to act contrary to the law of God, and, so, he sins. Consequently, conscience, no matter how false it is, obliges under pain of sin.  

Furthermore (4), according to Damascene: *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith,* bk. 4, ch. 22 (PG 94:1200A).)* *conscience is the law of our understanding.* But to act contrary to a law is a sin. Therefore, it is also a sin to act against conscience in any way.  

Furthermore (5), one is bound by a precept. But that which conscience dictates becomes a precept. Therefore, conscience binds, no matter how false it may be.  

I answer that there are different opinions on this matter. For some say *(Cf. Alexander of Hales, *Summa fratris Alexandri,* bk. 2, part 2, n. 388, p. 387; Bonaventure, *In II Sent.,* d. 39, a. 1, q. 3.)* that conscience can be mistaken both in things which are intrinsically evil and also with regard to indifferent things. Furthermore, a mistaken conscience does not bind in things which are intrinsically evil, but does bind with regard to indifferent things. But those who say this do not seem to understand in what sense conscience imposes an obligation. For conscience is said to bind in so far as one sins if he does not follow his conscience, but not in the sense that he acts correctly if he does follow it. Otherwise, a counsel would be called obligatory, for one who fulfills a counsel acts correctly. Still, we do not say that we are bound to counsels, since one who neglects what is of counsel does not sin. But we say that we are bound to precepts because, if we do not keep them, we commit sin. Therefore, conscience is not said to bind in the sense that what one does according to such a conscience will be good, but in the sense that in not following it he will sin. Moreover, it does not seem possible for a man to avoid sin if his conscience, no matter how mistaken, declares that something which is indifferent or intrinsically evil is a command of God, and with such a conscience he decides to do the opposite. For, as far as he can, he has by this very fact decided not to observe the law of God. Consequently, he sins mortally. Accordingly, although such a false conscience can be changed, nevertheless, as long as it remains, it is binding, since one who acts against it necessarily commits a sin. However, a correct conscience and a false conscience bind in different ways. The correct conscience binds absolutely and for an intrinsic reason; the false binds in a qualified way and for an extrinsic reason.  

I say that a correct conscience binds absolutely because it binds without qualification and in every circumstance. For, if one’s conscience tells him to avoid adultery, he cannot change that conscience without sin, since he would commit a serious sin in the very error of changing such a conscience. Moreover, as long as it remains, it cannot actually be set aside without sin. Thus, it binds absolutely and in every event. But a false conscience binds only in a qualified way, since it binds conditionally. For one whose conscience tells him he must fornicate is not obliged in such a way that he cannot omit the fornication without sin except on condition that such a conscience remains. But this situation can be changed, and without sin. Hence, such a conscience does not oblige in every event. For something can happen, namely, a change of conscience, and, when this takes place, one is no longer bound. That which is only conditional is said to be qualified. I also say that a correct conscience binds for an intrinsic reason, and a false conscience binds for an extrinsic reason. This is clear from the following. For one who wishes or desires something because of something else desires that because of which he desires the others for an intrinsic reason, and the other for an extrinsic reason, as it were. Thus, one who loves wine because of its sweetness loves sweetness for an intrinsic reason, and wine for an extrinsic reason. But one who has a false conscience and believes that it is correct (otherwise, he would not be mistaken), clings to his false conscience because of the correctness he believes is there, and, strictly speaking, clings to a correct conscience, but one which is false accidentally, as it were, in so far as this conscience, which he believes to be correct, happens to be false. *(This example is from Aristotle, *Topics* 2.3, 111a4; cf. Aquinas, *ST* I-II*.*26.4, s.c.)* It is for this reason that, strictly speaking, he is bound by a correct conscience, but accidentally by a false conscience. We can find this solution from what the philosopher says *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 7.9, 1151a29.)* when he asks almost the same question, that is, whether one is guilty of excess only if he departs from right reason, or also if he departs from a mistaken reason. His solution is that one who departs from right reason goes to excess essentially, and one who departs from mistaken reason goes to excess accidentally. And a man departs absolutely from the former and with some qualification from the latter, for what is essential is absolute, and what is accidental is qualified.  

Reply Obj. 1: Although that which a false conscience dictates is out of harmony with the law of God, the one who is mistaken considers it the law of God. Therefore, taking the thing in itself, if he departs from this, he departs from the law of God, although it would be accidental that he does not depart from the law of God.  

Reply Obj. 2: The argument proceeds correctly when there are distinct commands from higher and lower sources, and both, as essentially distinct, reach the one who is obliged by the command. But this is not the situation here, since the dictate of conscience is nothing other than the delivery of a divine command to him who has the conscience, as is clear from what we have said. *(Above: a. 3.)* In the proposed example the cases would be similar if the command of the emperor could never reach a man except through the proconsul, and the proconsul would not order anything except in so far as he repeated the emperor’s commands. Then, it would be the same thing to despise the command of the emperor and the command of the proconsul, whether the latter spoke the truth or lied.  

Reply Obj. 3: A false conscience which is mistaken in things which are intrinsically evil commands something which is contrary to the law of God. Nevertheless, it says that what it commands is the law of God. Accordingly, one who acts against such a conscience becomes a kind of transgressor of the law of God, although one who follows such a conscience and acts according to it acts against the law of God and sins mortally. For there was sin in the error itself, since it happened because of ignorance of that which one should have known.  

Reply Obj. 4: When a conscience is not probable, it should be changed. But, as long as such a conscience remains, one sins mortally if he acts against it. Hence, this does not prove that a false conscience does not bind as long as it remains, but that it does not bind absolutely and in every event.  

Reply Obj. 5: We do not conclude from that argument that a false conscience does not bind under pain of sin if it is not followed, but that, if it is followed, it excuses from sin. Consequently, the argument is not to the point. When the error itself is not a sin, the conclusion is true, as when the error is due to ignorance of some fact. But, if it is ignorance of a law, *(Cf. *Decretals of Gregory IX,* bk. 2, cause 1, q. 4, ch. 12 (ed. Friedberg I, 422).)* the conclusion is wrong because the ignorance itself is a sin. For before a civil judge, also, one who thus appeals to ignorance of a law which he should know is not excused.  

Reply Obj. 6: Although in natural reason there is a basis for proceeding to the opposite of that which a false conscience dictates, whether the mistake is about indifferent things or things intrinsically evil, natural reason does not actually dictate the opposite. For, if it did dictate the opposite, conscience would not be mistaken.  

Reply Obj. 7: Although an indifferent action, in so far as the act itself is concerned, can be accepted or rejected, still, when one thinks that such an action has been commanded, it loses its indifference because of his judgment.  

Reply Obj. 8: One whose conscience tells him to commit fornication is not completely perplexed, because he can do something by which he can avoid sin, namely, change the false conscience. But he is perplexed to some degree, that is, as long as the false conscience remains. And there is no difficulty in saying that, if some condition is presupposed, it is impossible for a man to avoid sin; just as, if we presuppose the intention of vainglory, one who is required to give alms cannot avoid sin. For, if he gives alms, because of such an intention, he sins; but, if he does not give alms, he violates the law.  

Reply Obj. 9: When a false conscience says that something must be done, it commands this under some aspect of good, either as a work of justice, or temperance, and so forth. Therefore, one who acts against such a conscience falls into the vice opposed to the virtue to which his conscience thinks it belongs when commanding it. Or, if such a conscience orders something under the guise of a command of God, or only of some superior, he commits the sin of disobedience by going against it.
