# Article 2 — Whether conscience can be mistaken

Second, it is asked whether conscience can be mistaken? *(Parallel texts: Aquinas, *In II Sent*., d. 24, q. 2, a. 4; d. 39, q. 3, a. 2; *Quodlibet*, bk. 3, q. 12, a. 1; q. 26.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it cannot, for the natural power of judgment is never mistaken. But, according to Basil, conscience is *the natural power of judgment.* Therefore, it is not mistaken. *(Basil, *In Principium Proverbiorum*, homily 12, n. 9 (PG 31:405C).)*  

Obj. 2: Conscience adds something to scientific knowledge. Moreover, that which it adds in no way detracts from the nature of scientific knowledge. But scientific knowledge is never mistaken, since it is the habit by which one always speaks the truth, as is clear in the *Ethics.* *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 6.3, 1139b15.)* Therefore, neither can conscience be mistaken.  

Obj. 3: Synderesis is *a spark of conscience*, as Jerome says. *(*Glossa ordinaria,* at Ezekiel 1:9, 4.1074; from Jerome, *Commentary on Ezekiel*, bk. 1, ch. 1 (PL 25:22B).)* Therefore, conscience is related to synderesis as fire is to a spark. But the activity and movement of a fire and of a spark [from it] are the same. Therefore, the activity and movement of conscience and synderesis are also the same. But synderesis is never mistaken. Therefore, neither is conscience.  

Obj. 4: According to Damascene, *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 4, ch. 22 (PG 94:1200A).)* conscience is the *law of our understanding*. But the law of our understanding is more certain than the understanding itself, and, *understanding is always correct,* as is said in *On the Soul.* *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.10, 433a26.)* Therefore, with much greater reason, conscience is always correct.  

Obj. 5: Reason, in so far as it is coincident with synderesis, does not make mistakes. But reason joined to synderesis constitutes conscience. Therefore, conscience never makes mistakes.  

Obj. 6: The testimony of witnesses is decisive in court. But conscience is the witness in the divine court, as is clear from Romans 2:15: *their conscience bearing witness to them.* *(The recension of the Paris manuscript (Paris B. N. lat. 15467) and of the Vetus Latina reads *conscientia ipsorum*.)* Therefore, since the divine court never can be deceived, it seems that conscience can never err.  

Obj. 7: In all things, the rule which regulates other things must be infallibly correct. But conscience is a rule of human actions. Therefore, conscience must always be correct.  

Obj. 8: Hope depends on conscience, according to the Gloss *(Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 1 Timothy*, at 1 Timothy 1:5 (PL 192:329C).)* on the first Epistle to Timothy 1:5: *from a pure heart, and a good conscience*. But hope is most certain, according to Hebrews 6:18: *we have the most certain comfort,* *(The recension of the Paris manuscript (B.N. lat. 15467) and of the Vetus Latina reads *Fortissimum*.)* *who have fled for refuge to hold fast the hope set before us*. Therefore, conscience is infallibly correct.  

On the contrary (1), in John 16:2 we read: *the hour cometh, when whosoever kills you, will think that he doth a service to God.* Therefore, their conscience told those who killed the apostles that they would please God by this action. But this was a mistake. Therefore, conscience makes mistakes.  

Furthermore (2), conscience includes comparison. But reason can be deceived when it makes comparisons. Therefore, conscience can make mistakes.  

I answer that as is clear from what has been said, *(Above: a. 1.)* conscience is nothing but the application of knowledge to some special act. Error, however, can occur in this application in two ways; in one, because that which is applied has error within it, and, in the other, because the application is faulty. Thus, in using a syllogism, mistakes can happen in two ways: either from the use of false premises, or from faulty construction of the syllogism. But this use of something false takes place only in one of the premises and not in the other. For, as has been said, *(Above: a. 1.)* through conscience the knowledge of synderesis and of higher and lower reason are applied to the examination of a particular act. However, since the act is particular and the judgment of synderesis is universal, the judgment of synderesis can be applied to the act only if some particular judgment is used as the minor premise. Sometimes, higher reason furnishes this particular judgment; sometimes, lower reason does. Thus, the act of conscience is the result of a kind of particular syllogism. For example, if the judgment of synderesis expresses this statement: “I must not do anything which is forbidden by the law of God,” and if the knowledge of higher reason presents this minor premise: “sexual intercourse with this woman is forbidden by the law of God,” the application of conscience will be made by concluding: “I must abstain from this intercourse.”  

Error has no place in the general judgment of synderesis, as is clear from what we have said earlier, *(Above: a. 1 ad 1; q. 16, a. 2 ad 1.)* but a mistake can occur in the judgment of higher reason, as happens when one judges something to be licit or illicit which is not, as heretics *(And this was the position of the Manichaeans; cf. Bonaventure, *In III Sent.,* d. 39, a. 2, q. 1; the Waldenses fell into this error according to Alan of Lille, *Contra haereticos,* bk. 2, ch. 18 (PL 210:392); Moneta of Cremona, *Adversus Catharos et Waldenses,* bk. 5, ch. 9, part 1, para. 1.)* who believe that oaths are forbidden by God. Therefore, mistakes occur in conscience because of the error which existed in the higher part of reason. Similarly, error can occur in conscience because of error which exists in the lower part of reason, as happens when one is mistaken about civil norms *(That is: *convenientes civilitati*; cf. Albert the Great, q. "De rationi inferiori et superiori*"* (ms. Vat. lat. 781, f. 36vb).)* of what is just or unjust, good or bad. Error also occurs because conscience does not make a correct application to acts. For, as in constructing speculative syllogisms one can neglect the proper form of argumentation, and thus arrive at a false conclusion, so he can do the same in practical syllogisms, as has been said. *(Above: a. 1 ad 1; q. 16, a. 2 ad 1.)*  

Still, we must remember that in some things conscience can never make a mistake, namely, when the particular act to which conscience is applied has a universal judgment about it in synderesis. For, as in speculative matters, error does not occur when we are dealing with particular conclusions which are derived directly from universal principles and expressed in the same terms—as for instance, no one is deceived in the judgment: “this whole is greater than its part,” *(Cf. Peter of Spain, *Summulae logicales,* tract. 5, n. 7; William of Auxerre, *Summa aurea*, bk. 3, tract. 3, ch. 1.)* just as no one is deceived in the judgment: “every whole is greater than its part”—so, too, no conscience can err in the judgments: “I should not love God” or “some evil should be done.” For, in each of these syllogisms, the speculative as well as the practical, the major premise is self-evident in so far as it exists in the universal judgment, and the minor, by means of which the particular predication of identity is made, is also self-evident. This is the case when one says: “every whole is greater than its part. This whole is a whole. Therefore, it is greater than its part.”  

Reply Obj. 1: Conscience is called the natural power of judgment in so far as it is a conclusion derived from that power. And in this conclusion there can be error; not, however, because of error in the natural power of judgment, but because of an error of the particular judgment used in the minor premise or because of a faulty reasoning process, as has been said.  

Reply Obj. 2: Conscience adds to scientific knowledge the application of that knowledge to a particular act. There can be error in the application, although there is not error in the scientific knowledge itself. Or we should say that, *(Albert the Great, q. "De conscientia" (ms. Vat. lat. 781, f.38ra).)* when I say conscience, I do not imply scientific knowledge (*scientia*) alone, taken strictly in so far as it deals only with things which are true, but taken in the broad sense for any knowledge (*notitia*) . In this sense, according to the common use of the word, we say that we know (*scire*) everything with which we are acquainted (*novisse*) .  

Reply Obj. 3: Just as the spark is that part of fire which is purer and hovers above the whole fire, so synderesis is that which is supreme in the judgment of conscience. And it is according to this metaphor that synderesis is called a spark of conscience, nor is it necessary for the relation between synderesis and conscience to be the same as that between a spark and fire in all other respects. Yet, even in material fire the fire receives some modification because a foreign element is added to it, a modification which a spark, because of its purity, does not receive. So, too, some error can find its way into conscience because it has to do with particulars, which are, as it were, matter foreign to reason. This error does not occur in synderesis existing in its purity.  

Reply Obj. 4: Conscience is called the law of understanding by reason of that which it has from synderesis. It is never this, but something else which is the source of error, as has been said.  

Reply Obj. 5: Although reason does not err because it is united to synderesis, still, when higher or lower reason is mistaken, it can be applied to synderesis, just as a false minor premise is united with a true major.  

Reply Obj. 6: The testimony of witnesses is decisive in court when it cannot be shown false through other clear evidence. But, in one whose conscience is erroneous, the testimony of his conscience is shown to be false by the very dictate of synderesis. Thus, in the divine court not the testimony of a mistaken conscience, but the dictates of the natural law, will be decisive.  

Reply Obj. 7: Not conscience, but synderesis, is the first rule of human activity. Conscience, however, is a kind of rule which is itself regulated. Hence, it is not strange that it can make mistakes.  

Reply Obj. 8: The hope which is based on a correct conscience has certainty, and this hope is freely given hope. However, the hope which is based on a false conscience is that of which it is said: *the hope of the wicked shall perish* (Prov 10:28).
