# Article 3 — Whether Adam in the state of innocence had faith about God

Third, it is asked whether Adam in the state of innocence had faith about God? *(Parallel texts: *In II Sent*., d. 29, a. 3; *ST* I.95.3; *ST* II-II.5.1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he did not, for the knowledge of faith is obscure knowledge, *(Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 1 Corinthians*, at 1 Cor 13:12 (PL 191:1662A); *Sentences,* bk. 3, d. 26, ch. 4.)* as is clear in the first Epistle to the Corinthians 13:12: *we see now in a glass*. But in the state of innocence Adam had plain, not obscure, knowledge. Therefore, he did not have faith.  

Obj. 2: Hugh of St. Victor says: *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments,* bk. 1, part 6, ch. 14 (176:271C).)* *he knew his Creator not with the knowledge with which believers now seek their absent Creator by faith*. We conclude as before.  

Obj. 3: Gregory says *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues,* bk. 4, ch. 1 (PL 77:320B).)* that faith belongs to him *who cannot know by experience* the things which must be believed. But, as is said in the same place, *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues,* bk. 4, ch. 1 (PL 77:320A).)* Adam knew by experience what we believe. Therefore, he did not have faith.  

Obj. 4: Faith concerns not only the Creator but also the Redeemer. But in the state of innocence Adam seems to have known nothing about the Redeemer, because he did not foresee his fall, without which there would have been no redemption. *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 23, ch. 4.)* Therefore, Adam did not have faith.  

On the contrary (1), Augustine says *(Augustine, *City of God,* bk. 14, ch. 26 (PL 41:434).)* that in the state of innocence Adam had *the charity of a pure heart and a good conscience and faith unfeigned*.  

Furthermore (2), as the Master says, he had all the virtues. *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 29, ch. 2.)* Therefore, he also had faith.  

I answer that in his first state, Adam had faith. This becomes evident if we consider the object of faith. For the object of faith is the first truth itself, in so far as it is not evident. *(Philip the Chancellor, *Summa de bono*.)* Moreover, I say not evident, either through an intentional likeness, as it appears to the blessed, or through natural reason, as some things about God are known to some philosophers, as that he is intelligible, incorporeal, and so on. Adam, however, knew not only what can be known about God by natural reason, but even more. However, he did not attain to vision of God through his essence. Consequently, it is clear that he had knowledge of God through faith.  

But faith is twofold, according to a twofold hearing and a twofold speaking. For *faith cometh by hearing*, as is said in Romans 10:17. Now, there is an external speaking, *(Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Romans*, at Romans 10:17 (PL 191:1479B).)* by which God speaks to us through preachers, and an interior speaking, by which he speaks to us through an internal inspiration. This internal inspiration is called a kind of speaking in view of its likeness to external speaking. For, as in external speaking we present to the hearer not the thing itself which we want to make known but a sign of that thing, that is to say, a word which expresses some meaning; so in internal inspiration it is not his essence which God presents to view, but some sign of his essence, which is some spiritual likeness of his wisdom. Faith arises in the hearts of the faithful from both kinds of hearing. By interior hearing it arose in those who first received faith and taught it, as in the apostles and prophets. Hence, in Psalm 85:8 *(Vulgate: Psalm 84:9.)* we read: *I will hear what the Lord God will speak in me.* But faith arises in the hearts of the rest of the faithful, who receive knowledge of the faith through other men, by the second kind of hearing. Adam, however, had faith, and as one who first learned it from God. Therefore, he should have had faith through interior speaking.  

Reply Obj. 1: He did not have knowledge so plain that it was enough to remove the obscurity of faith. This is removed only through the appearance of the first truth.  

Reply Obj. 2: Hugh denies to the first man the kind of knowledge of faith which belongs to us, who have knowledge of faith, not through a revelation made to us, but through adherence to revelations made to others.  

Reply Obj. 3: That experience which man had was not the kind which those who see God through his essence have, as has been said earlier. *(Above: a. 1.)* Therefore, it is not enough to make faith superfluous.  

Reply Obj. 4: Adam had only implicit and not explicit faith about the Redeemer in so far as he believed that God would make ample provision for all the things which would be necessary for his salvation.
