# Article 1 — Whether man in the state of innocence knew God through his essence

The question concerns the knowledge of the first man in the state of innocence, and first, it is asked whether man in that state knew God through his essence? *(Parallel texts: *In II Sent*., d. 23, q. 2, a. 1; *In III Sent*., d. 35, q. 2, a. 2, qa. 1; *ST* I.79.1; I.94.1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he did, for the Master says: *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 4, d. 1, ch. 5.)* *before sin, man saw God independently of any medium*. But to see God independently of any medium is to see God through his essence. Therefore in the state of innocence man saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 2: It was said *(Cf. Alexander of Hales, *Summa fratris Alexandri,* bk. 2, part 1, inq. 4, tract. 3, q. 4, a. 2, ad 2, n. 518, 2:769.)* that the Master means that man saw God without a medium as far as obscurity due to sin is concerned, but not that he saw God without using creatures as a medium.  

*On the contrary*, in that same place the Master says that, *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 4, d. 1, ch. 5.)* since we see God through a medium, we must reach him by means of visible creatures. Therefore, he seems to mean the use of creatures as a medium. But to see without the use of creatures as a medium is to see through the essence. Therefore.  

Obj. 3: In Philippians 4:7 it is said: *and the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding*. But this means the peace which God gives the blessed in heaven. The Gloss explains *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Philippians*, at Phil 4:7 (PL 192:254B).)* it in this way: *all understanding, that is, our understanding, not the understanding of those who always see the face of the Father.* From this we see that the peace or joy of the blessed surpasses the understanding of all those who do not possess that joy. But Adam in his innocence saw the joys of the blessed. Hence, Gregory says: *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues,* bk. 4, ch. 1 (PL 77:317C).)* *man, losing himself by sin, could not then see those joys of heaven which he was accustomed to contemplate before*. Therefore, in that state Adam possessed the joy of heaven.  

Obj. 4: Hugh of St. Victor says: *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments,* bk. 1, part 6, ch. 14 (PL 176:271C); part. 5, ch. 14.)* *in that state man knew his Creator with the knowledge with which he was then more clearly seen as present in contemplation.* But to see God as present in contemplation would seem to be to see him through his essence. Therefore, in the state of innocence Adam saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 5: Man was made to see God. For God made rational creatures to participate in his beatitude. This consists in seeing him, as is shown in the *Sentences.* *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 1 ch. 4.)* Therefore, if Adam in the state of innocence did not see God through his essence, this was only because some medium prevented him from doing so. However, the medium due to sin did not prevent him, for he was then free from sin. Nor did the use of creatures as a medium prevent him, for God is closer to the rational soul than any creature is. *(Cf. William of Auxerre, *Summa aurea,* bk. 3, tract. 11.)* Therefore, in the state of innocence Adam saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 6: Just as the affective part of man is perfected only by the highest good, so the cognitive part is perfected only by the highest truth, as is clear from *Spirit and Soul.* *(Pseudo-Augustine (Alcher of Clairvaux), *On the Spirit and the Soul*, ch. 11 (PL 40:786).)* But everyone has within him the desire of his perfection. Therefore, in his original state Adam desired to see God through his essence. But whoever is deprived of that which he desires suffers. Therefore, if Adam did not then see God through his essence, he suffered. However, this is false, because suffering, since it is a punishment, cannot precede sin. Therefore, he saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 7: The soul of man *is so made to God’s image that it is formed by the first truth itself without the interposition of any creature,* as is said in *Spirit and Soul.* *(Pseudo-Augustine (Alcher of Clairvaux), *On the Spirit and the Soul*, ch. 11 (PL 40:786); cf. ch. 10.)* But the image remained pure and whole in man in the state of innocence. Therefore, he was brought to the highest truth itself without any medium. Consequently, he saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 8: For us actually to understand something, all that is needed is the formation of actually intelligible species through abstraction from matter and the conditions of matter, which is the work of the agent intellect, and reception in our understanding, which is the work of the potential intellect. But the divine essence is of itself intelligible, inasmuch as it is completely separated from matter. It was also at the very center of man’s soul, since God is said *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 1, d. 37, ch. 1.)* to be in all things through his essence. Therefore, since in the state of innocence there would be no obstacle in the soul of man, it seems that he saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 9: Since in the state of innocence Adam’s soul was properly ordered, higher reason was not less perfectly disposed toward its object than lower reason toward its proper object. But lower reason, whose task it is to give its attention to temporal things, could see those temporal things immediately. Therefore, higher reason, *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 12, ch. 7 (PL 42:1005).)* whose task it is to contemplate eternal things, could see immediately the eternal essence of God.  

Obj. 10: That by which something is made actually sensible, namely, light, is known immediately by the sense of sight. Therefore, that by which something becomes actually intelligible is known immediately by man’s understanding. But a thing is made actually intelligible by another only in so far as that other is in act. So, since God alone is pure act, he himself is that by which all things become intelligible. Therefore, man’s understanding in the first state saw God immediately, since then it had no obstacle.  

Obj. 11: Damascene says *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith,* bk. 2, ch. 11 (PG 94:912A); cf. ch. 12.)* that in the state of innocence man *had a life which was blessed and rich in all things.* But life’s beatitude consists in seeing God through his essence. Therefore, he then saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 12: Damascene says: *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith,* bk. 2, ch. 11 (PG 94:916C); cf. bk. 3, ch. 11.)* *man was then refreshed by the enjoyment of the sweetest contemplation, like another angel.* But the angels see God through his essence. Therefore, in that state, Adam saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 13: Man’s nature was more perfect in the state of innocence than after the fall. But after the fall some were allowed to see God through his essence while they still lived in this mortal life, as Augustine says *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis,* bk. 12, cc. 26–28 (PL 34:477–478); *Epistulae*, letter 147, “To Paulina” (*De videndo Deum*), ch. 13 (PL 33:610).)* of Paul and Moses. Therefore, with much greater reason Adam in the state of innocence saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 14: The Gloss on Genesis 2:21, *(*Glossa ordinaria,* at Genesis 2:21; Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 9, ch. 19 (PL 34:408).)* *then the Lord God cast a deep sleep upon Adam*, says: *the correct interpretation is that Adam was made to fall into the ecstasy so that his mind, becoming a part of the angelic court and entering the sanctuary of God, might understand the last things.* From this it seems that that sleep was a kind of rapture. But those who are enraptured see God through his essence. Therefore, Adam, also, saw him through his essence.  

Obj. 15: According to Damascene, *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith,* bk. 2, ch. 11 (PG 94:916B).)* Adam was placed not only in a corporeal but also in a spiritual paradise. But spiritual paradise is nothing other than beatitude, which consists in the sight of God through his essence. Therefore, he saw God through his essence.  

Obj. 16: Augustine says: *(Augustine, *City of God,* bk. 14, ch. 10 (PL 41:417); cf. bk. 13, ch. 10.)* *in the state of innocence nothing was missing which a good will could acquire.* But a good will could acquire the sight of God through his essence. Therefore, this was not missing in the first parents. Therefore, they saw God through his essence.  

On the contrary (1), Augustine says *(Augustine, *On the Trinity,* bk. 1, cc. 8–9 (PL 42:833); William of Auxerre cites it word for word in *Summa aurea*, bk. 2, tract. 3, q. 1; Augustine recounts it in *Expositions on the Psalms*, at Psalm 90:16, sermon 2 (PL 37:1170).)* that the sight of God through his essence is *the whole reward* of the saints. But in the state of innocence Adam was not one of the blessed. Therefore, he did not see God through his essence.  

Furthermore (2), Bernard says *(Pseudo-Bernard (William of Saint-Thierry), *De contemplando Dei,* ch. 8 (PL 184:376).)* that in this life God can be loved entirely, but not seen entirely. But he would be seen entirely if he were seen through his essence, since his essence is simple. Therefore, while he was in this life Adam could not see God through his essence.  

Furthermore (3), when the soul is weighed down by the burden of the flesh, *(Augustine, *Retractions,* bk. 1, ch. 8 (PL 32:594), as Bonaventure refers to in *In II Sent.,* d. 39, a. 1, q. 2, s.c. 2.)* it loses distinct knowledge of things. Hence, Boethius says: *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy,* bk. 5, verse 3 (PL 63:845A); cf. bk. 3, verse 3.)* *retaining the sum total, it loses the individuals*. But in the state of innocence man’s soul was weighed down to some extent by the body, although not as much as after sin. Therefore, he was withheld from sight of the divine essence, for which the mind must be most perfectly disposed.  

Furthermore (4), it is proper to Christ alone to be wayfarer and possessor at the same time. *(On the word *viator*, see William of Auxerre, *Summa aurea*, bk. 3, tract. 11, q. 2.)* But in the state of innocence Adam was a wayfarer, as is clear from the fact that he could sin. Hence, he was not a possessor, and so did not see God through his essence.  

I answer that some have said *(These individuals are not known to the editors of the 1970 Leonine edition; see Alexander of Hales, *Summa fratris Alexandri,* bk. 2, part 1, inq. 4, tract. 3, q. 4, mem. 2, ch. 1, a. 1, n. 517, 2:765; Bonaventure, *In II Sent.*, d. 23, a. 2, q. 3, where the same opinion is recounted.)* that there is sight of God through his essence not only in heaven but also in this life, although not as perfectly in this life as in heaven. According to this opinion, man in the state of innocence had a sight midway between the sight of the blessed and the sight of man after the fall. For he saw less perfectly than the blessed, but more perfectly than man can see after the fall. But this position is contrary to the testimony of Scripture, *(Cf. 1 John 3:2 and 1 Corinthians 13:12; see Alexander of Hales, *Summa fratris Alexandri,* bk. 2, part 1, inq. 4, tract. 3, q. 4, mem. 2, ch. 1, a. 1, n. 517, 2:764; Bonaventure, *In II Sent.,* d. 23, a. 2, q. 3.)* which consistently makes the sight of God man’s final beatitude. Hence, from the very fact that a man sees God through his essence he is blessed. Thus, as the common opinion maintains, *(See Alexander of Hales, *Summa fratris Alexandri,* bk. 2, part 1, inq. 4, tract. 3, q. 4, mem. 2, ch. 1, a. 1, n. 517, 2:763; Albert the Great, *In II Sent.,* d. 23, a. 2; Bonaventure, *In II Sent.,* d. 23, a. 2, q. 3.)* no one still on the way to beatitude can see God through his essence, not even Adam in the state of innocence. And reason can show the truth of this.  

For every nature has something ultimate in which its final perfection consists. Now, the perfection of man, in so far as he is man, consists only in the act of understanding, by which he is constituted man. However, in the activity of understanding different levels can be distinguished in two ways. In one they derive from the diversity of intelligible objects. For, as the intelligible object which a person understands is more noble, so the more noble is his intelligence. For this reason, the *Ethics* *(Aristotle, *Ethics,* 10.4, 1174b14; 10.7, 177a12; 10.8, 1178b24 .)* says that the most perfect activity of understanding is the activity of that understanding which is well ordered to the best intelligible thing, just as the most beautiful physical sight is that of the sight *which is well ordered to the most beautiful object of sight*. In the other way, levels in the activity of understanding derive from the manner of understanding. For it is possible for one and the same intelligible object to be understood differently by different minds, more perfectly by one, and less perfectly by another. However, it is not possible for the final limit of human perfection to be taken according to some manner of understanding, for among these modes of understanding one can perceive an infinite number of levels, one of which understands more perfectly than another. Nor is there any one who understands so perfectly that it is impossible to devise another who understands more perfectly, except God, who understands everything with infinite clarity. Hence, the final term of human perfection must lie in the understanding of some most perfect intelligible object, which is the divine essence. Accordingly, every rational creature finds its beatitude in this, that it sees the essence of God, and not in this, that it sees it with such a degree of clarity, or more or less. Consequently, the sight of the blessed is not distinguished from the sight of those in this life because the former see more perfectly and the latter less perfectly, but because the former see and the latter do not see. Therefore, since Adam was still on the way to beatitude, he did not see God through his essence.  

Reply Obj. : In a given sight a threefold medium can be discerned. One is the medium *under which* it is seen; the second that *by which* it is seen, and this is the intentional likeness of the thing seen; the third is that *from which* one obtains knowledge of the thing seen. Thus, for instance, in bodily sight the medium under which a thing is seen is light, by which the thing becomes actually visible and the power of sight is given the perfection of seeing. The medium by which a thing is seen is the sensible species itself of the thing existing in the eye, which, as the form of the one seeing in so far as he is seeing, is the principle of the activity of sight. And the medium from which one receives knowledge of a thing seen is like a mirror, from which the eye at times receives the species of some visible thing, for example, a stone, and not from the stone itself. We find these three in intellectual sight, too. Thus, the light of the agent intellect corresponds to physical light as the medium under which our understanding sees. The intelligible species, by which the potential intellect is made actually to understand, corresponds to the visible species. And, finally, the effects from which we come to a knowledge of a cause correspond to the medium from which knowledge of the thing seen is obtained, as from a mirror. *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 1 Corinthians*, at 1 Cor 13:12 (PL 191:1662A); Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 3, d. 26, ch. 4.)* For the likeness of the cause is not imprinted on our understanding directly by the cause, but by the effect, in which a likeness of the cause shines forth. Consequently, this type of knowledge is called “mirrored” knowledge because of the likeness which it has to sight which takes place through a mirror. Therefore, to know God, man, as he is after the fall, needs a medium which is like a mirror, in which there arises a likeness of God himself. For we must reach the invisible things of him . . . *by the things that are made*, according to Romans 1:20. Man in the state of innocence, however, did not need this medium, but he did need a medium which is somewhat like the species of the thing seen, because he saw God through a spiritual light which was given to the human mind by God, and which was a kind of expressed likeness of the uncreated light. But he will not need this medium in heaven, because he will see the essence of God in itself and not through any intelligible or sensible likeness of it, since no created likeness can so perfectly represent God that one who sees through it can know the essence of God. Yet, he will need the light of glory, which will be a kind of medium under which God is seen, according to Psalm 36:9: *in your light we shall see light*. *(Vulgate: Psalm 35:10.)* The reason for this is that this sight is not natural to any creature, but only to God. As a result, no creature can reach it by his own natural power, but to acquire it one must be enlightened by a divinely given light. The second sight, through a medium which is an intentional likeness, is natural to the angels, but above human nature. Accordingly, for it man needs the light of grace. The third sight is proper to human nature; hence, it alone remains in man after the fall. Therefore, it is clear that the sight by which man in the state of innocence saw God was midway between the sight which we now have and the sight of the blessed. Accordingly, it is clear that after the fall man needs a triple medium to see God: creatures themselves, from which he rises to knowledge of God; a likeness of God, which he gets from creatures; and a light from which he receives the perfection of being directed toward God. This light may be the light of nature, such as the light of the agent intellect, or the light of grace, such as that of faith and wisdom. In the state before the fall, however, he needed a double medium: one which is a likeness of God, and one which is a light elevating and directing his mind. The blessed, however, need only one medium, the light of glory which elevates the mind. And God sees himself without any medium, for he himself is the light by which he sees himself.  

Reply Obj. 2: The Master does not reject the possibility of seeing God in the state of innocence through some likeness of a creature as a medium, but only the necessity of the medium of visible creation.  

Reply Obj. 3: In the state of innocence Adam did not perceive the joys of the heavenly court so that he understood what and how great they were, for this belongs only to the blessed. However, he did know that they existed, because he, had some participation of them.  

Reply Obj. 4: In contemplation, God is seen through a medium which is the light of wisdom. This elevates the mind to the sight of things divine, not, however, to immediate vision of the divine essence itself. And it is in this way that God is seen through grace by the contemplatives after the fall, although he is seen more perfectly in the state of innocence.  

Reply Obj. 5: Man was made to see God, not in the beginning but in the last stage of his perfection. Therefore, that he did not see God through his essence at the beginning of his existence was not the result of being hindered by some obstacle, but only the result of his own imperfection, because he did not then have that perfection which is needed to see the divine essence.  

Reply Obj. 6: In the state of innocence Adam desired to see God through his essence, but that desire of his was well ordered. For he strove to see God when it would be time for him to do so. Hence, he did not suffer at all at not seeing God before the proper time.  

Reply Obj. 7: Our mind is said to be formed immediately by the first truth itself, not because [there is question whether] it knows the first truth at times through the mediation of some habit, species, or creature, but because it is formed by it as a copy is formed to the likeness of its immediate exemplar. For some have held, as Dionysius *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names,* ch. 6, para. 9 (PG 3:824D); cf. ch. 5.)* points out, that among beings the higher are the models for the lower, and thus the soul of man proceeds from God through the mediation of angels, and is formed to the divine model through the mediation of an angelic model. The passage cited denies this, for the human mind is created immediately by God and formed immediately by himself as its exemplar. For this reason, also, it achieves beatitude immediately in him as its end.  

Reply Obj. 8: Although, intrinsically, God is completely intelligible, and was present to the mind of man in the state of innocence, he was not there as an intelligible form. For man’s understanding did not yet have the perfection needed for this.  

Reply Obj. 9: The object of higher reason according to its natural state is not the divine essence itself, but certain intelligible characters which flow into. the mind from God and are received from creatures. By these we are brought to the perfection of sight of eternal things.  

Reply Obj. 10: The agent intellect is the immediate and proximate principle by which things which are potentially intelligible become actually intelligible. But the first principle by which all things become intelligible is uncreated light itself. Thus, the divine essence is compared to intelligible things as the substance of the sun is to visible bodies. However, it is not necessary for one who sees some color to see the substance of the sun, but only the light of the sun, in so far as it illumines color. Similarly, it is not necessary for one who knows some intelligible thing to see the divine essence, but only to perceive intelligible light, which originally derives from God, in so far as by it something is made actually intelligible.  

Reply Obj. 11: We should not take what Damascene says to mean that Adam was one of the blessed simply, but that he had the kind of beatitude which fitted his state. Similarly, in the state of affliction some are said to be blessed in some respect by reason of some perfection which exists in them, as in Matthew 5:3: *blessed are the poor in spirit*.  

Reply Obj. 12: Even the angels in the state of their original nature did not see God through his essence; this belonged to them only through glory. But in the state of innocence Adam had through grace the kind of sight which the angels had naturally, as has been said. Therefore, he is said to have seen as another angel.  

Reply Obj. 13: By a certain privilege of grace Moses and Paul saw God through his essence. Still, although simply they were in the state of wayfarers, in some respect, that is, in so far as they saw God through his essence, they were not in that state. Therefore in the state of innocence, in which he was still a wayfarer, Adam had no claim to vision of God through his essence. Yet, if by a rapture he was raised above the ordinary knowledge which belonged to him, and so saw God through his essence, it is not strange, for such a grace can be given just as well in the state of innocence as after the fall.  

Reply Obj. 14: If we maintain that Adam’s ecstasy was of the same nature as Paul’s rapture, then we will say that that vision surpassed the ordinary manner of sight which then belonged to him. But, since it does not explicitly say that in that sleep he saw God through his essence, we can say that in that ecstasy he was not elevated to a vision of the essence of God, but to a knowledge of certain more profound truths about the divine mysteries than was fitting for him to know at that time according to the common manner of human cognition.  

Reply Obj. 15: Spiritual paradise, in so far as it means perfect delight, which makes one blessed, consists in the sight of God. But, in so far as it means delight about God without qualification, it consists in any kind of contemplation which has God as its object.  

Reply Obj. 16: His will would not have been good and well ordered if he had desired to have at that time what did not then belong to him. For this reason, the conclusion does not follow.
