# Article 2 — Whether the separated soul knows singulars

Second, it is asked whether the separated soul does know singulars? *(Parallel texts: *In IV Sent.,* d. 50, q. 1, a. 3; *ST* I.89.4; *Disputed Questions on the Soul*, q. 20.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it does not, for if it knows singulars, it knows them either through species created with the soul, or through species it has acquired. But it does not know them through species which it has acquired, because the species received in the intellective part of the soul are not singular but universal. And it is only this part of the soul which is separated from the body, *as the perpetual from the corruptible,* according to the Philosopher. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.2, 413b25.)* Similarly, it does not know them through species created with the soul, for, since singulars are countless, there would have to be an infinite number of species created with the soul. But this is impossible. Therefore, the separated soul does not know singulars.  

Obj. 2: It was said that it knows singulars through a universal species.  

*On the contrary*, an indistinct species cannot be the source of distinct knowledge. But the universal species is indistinct, and knowledge of singulars is distinct. Therefore, separated souls cannot know singulars through universal species.  

Obj. 3: It was said *(Cf. Adam Pulchre-Mulieris, *De Intelligentiis,* prop. 30‒32; William Auvergne, *De universo*, bk. 1, ch. 13.)* that the separated soul conforms itself to the singular when the singular is present to it and thus knows the singular.  

*On the contrary*, when the singular thing is present to the soul, either something passes over from the singular into the soul, or nothing passes over. If something passes over, the separated soul receives something from singulars, which seems unfitting, but, if nothing passes over, the species existing in the soul remain general, and, so, nothing singular can be known through them.  

Obj. 4: Nothing which is in potency reduces itself from potency to act. But the cognoscitive soul is in potency to things which can be known. Therefore, it cannot reduce itself to act, and so conform itself to them. Consequently, it seems that the separated soul does not know singulars when they are present to it.  

On the contrary (1), in Luke 16:23 we read that the rich man in hell knew Abraham and Lazarus, and retained the knowledge of his brothers still living. Therefore, the separated soul knows singulars.  

Furthermore (2), there is not pain without knowledge. *(Cf. *ST* I-II.35.1.)* But the soul will undergo pain from the fire and the other punishments of hell. Therefore, it will know singulars.  

I answer that the separated soul, as has been said, *(Above: a. 1.)* knows in two ways. In one it knows through species infused when it is separated from the body; in the other, through species which it received while in the body. According to the first mode, *(Above: q. 3, a. 8.)* we have to ascribe to the separated soul a knowledge which is like angelic knowledge. Consequently, just as angels know singulars through the species given them at their creation, so, too, the soul will know them through the species given it at its separation from the body. For, since the ideas which exist in the divine mind are productive of things according to form and matter, they must be exemplars and likenesses of things according to both form and matter. Hence, through them God knows things not only in their generic and specific nature, which is derived from formal principles, but also in its singularity, whose principle is matter. But the forms which are created with angelic minds and which souls acquire when they are separated from the body are likenesses of those ideal forms which exist in the divine mind. Therefore, just as things derive from these ideas and so exist in form and matter, so also the species in created minds derive from them. And these species can know things according to form and to matter, that is, according to their universal nature and their singular nature. It is through this kind of species that the separated soul knows singulars.  

But the species which it has received from the senses are like things only in so far as these latter can act, and they act according to their form. Therefore, singulars can be known through them only in so far as they are received in another power which uses a bodily organ, in which they exist materially in some way, and so are received as individual. In the understanding, however, which is entirely free from matter, they can be a principle only of universal knowledge, unless, perhaps, through some reflection on phantasms, from which the intelligible species are abstracted. After death, when phantasms have been destroyed, there cannot be this reflection. However, the soul can apply universal forms of this type to singulars which it knows through another type of knowledge.  

Reply Obj. 1: The separated soul does not know singulars through the species which it acquired while in the body, nor through species created with the soul, but through species given it when it is separated from the body. Nevertheless, it is not necessary to have an infinite number of species infused into the soul to know singulars, because the singulars which it is to know are not actually infinite in number, and because a separated substance can know all the individuals of a species through one likeness of the species, in so far as that likeness of the species is made the proper likeness of each of the singulars according to its proper relation to this or that individual, as we said of the angels. *(Above: q. 8, aa. 10–11.)* This is also clear of the divine essence which is the proper likeness not only of the individuals of one species but of all beings according to the different relations which it has to different things.  

Reply Obj. 2: Although the species by which the separated soul knows singulars are intrinsically immaterial and therefore universal, they are likenesses of things both in their general nature and in their singular nature. Therefore, nothing prevents the soul from knowing singulars through them.  

Reply Obj. 3–4: We concede the other difficulties.
