# Article 11 — Whether knowledge predicated of God and man is purely equivocal

Eleventh, it is asked whether knowledge is predicated of God and men purely equivocally? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.13.5; *SCG* I.32–34; *Compendium theologiae*, ch. 27; *On the Power of God*, q. 7, a. 7; *In I Sent.,* prologue, a. 2, ad 2; d. 19, q. 5, a. 2, ad 1; cf. Moses Maimonides, *Guide for the Perplexed*, part 1, ch. 55; , *In I Sent*., d. 35, a. 4.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it is, for wherever there exists a common ground for univocal or analogical statement, there exists a certain likeness. But there can be no likeness between a creature and God. Therefore, there cannot be anything common to both either univocally or analogically. Consequently,’ if knowledge is predicated of God and of us, it will be merely an equivocal predication.  

*Proof of the minor*: in Isaiah 40:18 we read: *to whom then have you likened God*?—as if to say: *he can resemble no one.*  

Obj. 2: Wherever a likeness exists, some comparison is possible. But no comparison between God and creature is possible, since a creature is finite and God is infinite. Therefore, no likeness can exist between them, and the original difficulty stands.  

Obj. 3: Whenever a comparison is possible, there must be some form possessed to a greater and a lesser degree or equally by several things. But this cannot be said of God and a creature, for then something would be-more simple than God. Therefore, no comparison between God and a creature is possible, nor is any likeness or community possible apart from that of equivocation.  

Obj. 4: There is a greater distance between things which bear no resemblance than between those which do resemble each other. But there is an infinite distance between God and a creature; indeed, no greater distance is possible. Therefore, there is no likeness between them; thus, the original difficulty returns.  

Obj. 5: A greater distance lies between a creature and God than lies between a created being and non-being; for a created being surpasses non-being only by reason of the amount of its entity, which is not infinite. But, as is said in the *Metaphysics, there is nothing common to being and non-being except by equivocation, which happens, for example, when that which we call man is called non-man by others.* *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 4.4, 1006b18.)* Hence, there cannot be anything common to God and a creature except by a pure equivocation.  

Obj. 6: All analogates are such that either one is placed in the definition of another—as substance is placed in the definition of accident, and act, in the definition of potency—or the same thing is placed in the definition of both—as the health of an animal is placed in the definition of healthy, which is predicated of urine and food since one is the sign of this health and the other conserves it. But God and creatures are not related in this manner: one is not placed in the definition of the other, nor is something identical placed in the definition of each, even on the supposition that God could be defined. Therefore, it seems that nothing can be predicated analogously of God and creatures. As a consequence, any term predicated of both of them is used only equivocally.  

Obj. 7: Substance and accident differ more than do two species of substances. But when the same word is used to signify two species of substances according to formal character proper to each, the predication is merely equivocal. This happens, for example, when the word "dog" is applied to the dog-star, a barking dog, and the dog-fish. *(Example is from Boethius, *De divisione* (PL 64:877D).)* It would be a far more equivocal predication if one word were applied to a substance and an accident. Now, our knowledge is an accident and that of God, a substance. Therefore, the word "knowledge" is predicated equivocally of God’s and of ours.  

Obj. 8: Our knowledge is merely an image of the divine knowledge. But the name of a thing cannot be applied to its image except by equivocation. Hence, "animal," according to the Philosopher, *(Aristotle, *Categories*, ch. 1, 1a1.)* is predicated equivocally of a real animal and of one in a picture. Therefore, the word "knowledge" is likewise predicated only equivocally of God’s knowledge and ours.  

On the contrary (1), the Philosopher says that that is perfect, absolutely speaking, in which the perfections of all genera are found. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 5.16, 1021b30.)* As the Commentator remarks on this passage, *(Averroes, *Metaphysics*, bk. 5, comm. 21.)* such a being is God. But the perfections of other genera could not be said to be found in him unless there were some resemblance between his perfection and the perfections of other genera. Hence, a creature resembles God in some way. Knowledge, therefore, and whatever else is predicated of God and creatures is not a pure equivocation.  

Furthermore (2), Genesis 1:26 says: *let us make man to our image and likeness.* Therefore, some likeness exists between God and creature. We conclude as before.  

I answer that it is impossible to say that something is predicated univocally of a creature and God because in all univocal predication, the nature signified by the name is common to those of whom the univocal predication is made. *(Cf. Aristotle, *Categories*, ch. 1, 1a6.)* Hence, from the point of view of the nature signified by the predicate, the subjects of the univocal predication are equal, even though from the point of view of its real existence one may take precedence over another. For example, all numbers are equal from the point of view of the nature of number, even though, by the nature of things, one number is naturally prior to another. No matter how much a creature imitates God, however, a point cannot be reached where something would belong to it for the same reason it belongs to God. For things which have the same formal characters but are in separate subjects are common to the same subjects in regard to substance or quiddity but distinct in regard to the act of being. But whatever is in God is his own act of being; and just as his essence is the same as his act of being, so is his knowledge the same as his act of being a knower. Hence, since the act of existence proper to one thing cannot be communicated to another, it is impossible that a creature ever attain to the possession of something in the same manner in which God has it, just as it is impossible for it to attain the same act of being as that which God has. The same is true of us. If man and to exist as man did not differ in Socrates, man could not be predicated univocally of him and Plato, whose acts of existing are distinct. Nevertheless, it cannot be said that whatever is predicated of God and creatures is an equivocal predication; for, unless there were at least some real agreement between creatures and God, his essence would not be the likeness of creatures, and so he could not know them by knowing his essence. Similarly, we would not be able to attain any knowledge of God from creatures, nor from among the names devised for creatures could we apply one to him more than another; for in equivocal predication, it makes no difference what name is used, since the word does not signify any real agreement.  

Consequently, it must be said that knowledge is predicated neither entirely univocally nor yet purely equivocally of God’s knowledge and ours. Instead, it is predicated analogously, or, in other words, according to a proportion. Since an agreement according to proportion can happen in two ways, two kinds of community can be noted in analogy. There is a certain agreement between things having a proportion to each other from the fact that they have a determinate distance between each other or some other relation to each other, like the proportion which the number two has to unity in as far as it is the double of unity. Again, the agreement is occasionally noted not between two things which have a proportion between them, but rather between two related proportions—for example, six has something in common with four because six is two times three, just as four is two times two. The first type of agreement is one of proportion; the second, of proportionality. We find something predicated analogously of two realities according to the first type of agreement when one of them has a relation to the other, as when being is predicated of substance and accident because of the relation which accident has to substance, or as when healthy is predicated of urine and animal because urine has some relation to the health of an animal. Sometimes, however, a thing is predicated analogously according to the second type of agreement, as when sight is predicated of bodily sight and of the intellect because understanding is in the mind as sight is in the eye. *(Cf. Aristotle, *Topics* 1.17, 108a11.)* In those terms predicated according to the first type of analogy, there must be some definite relation between the things having something in common analogously. Consequently, nothing can be predicated analogously of God and creature according to this type of analogy; for no creature has such a relation to God that it could determine the divine perfection. But in the other type of analogy, no definite relation is involved between the things which have something in common analogously, so there is no reason why some name cannot be predicated analogously of God and creature in this manner.  

But this can happen in two ways. Sometimes the name implies something belonging to the thing primarily designated which cannot be common to God and creature even in the manner described above. This would be true, for example, of anything predicated of God metaphorically, as when God is called lion, sun, and the like, *(Hosea 13:8; Malachi 4:2.)* because their definition includes matter which cannot be attributed to God. At other times, however, a term predicated of God and creature implies nothing in its principal meaning which would prevent our finding between a creature and God an agreement of the type described above. To this kind belong all attributes which include no defect nor depend on matter for their act of existence, for example, being, the good, and similar things.  

Reply Obj. 1: As Dionysius says, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 9, para. 6 (PG 3:913C).)* God can in no way be said to be similar to creatures, but creatures can be said to be similar to him in some sense. For what is made in imitation of something, if it imitates it perfectly, can be said to be like it absolutely. The opposite, however, is not true; for a man is not said to be similar to his image but vice versa. However, if the imitation is imperfect, then it is said to be both like and unlike that which it imitates: like, in so far as it resembles it; unlike, in so far as it falls short of a perfect representation. It is for this reason that Holy Scripture denies that creatures are similar to God in every respect. *(Cf. Exodus 9:14; 2 Chronicles 6:14.)* It does, however, sometimes grant that creatures are similar to God, *(Genesis 5:1; Wisdom 11:23; James 1:9.)* and sometimes deny this. It grants the similarity when it says that man is made in the likeness of God, but denies it when it says: *O God, who is like to thee*? (Ps 71:19).  

Reply Obj. 2: The Philosopher distinguishes two kinds of likenesses. *(Aristotle, *Topics* 1.17, 108a7.)* One is found between things in different genera, and is taken according to proportion or proportionality; that is, one thing is related to another as a third thing is related to a fourth, as Aristotle himself says in the same place. The second kind of likeness is found existing between things in the same genus, as when the same thing is found in distinct subjects. Now, likeness of the first kind does not demand a comparison based on a definite relationship as does that of the second kind. Consequently, the possibility of the first type of likeness existing between God and creature should not be excluded.  

Reply Obj. 3: That difficulty arises from the second type of likeness; and we grant that this type does not exist between creature and God.  

Reply Obj. 4: A likeness that is found because two things share something in common or because one has such a determinate relation to the other that from one the other can be grasped by the intellect—such a likeness diminishes distance. A likeness according to an agreement of proportion does not; for such a likeness is also found between things far or little distant. Indeed, there is no greater likeness of proportionality between two to one and six to three than there is between two to one and one hundred to fifty. Consequently, the infinite distance between a creature and God does not take away the likeness mentioned above.  

Reply Obj. 5: There is some agreement between being and non-being according to analogy, for non-being itself is called being analogously, as is made clear in the *Metaphysics.* *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 4.2, 1003b10.)* Consequently, the distance lying between a creature and God cannot prevent a common ground for analogical statement.  

Reply Obj. 6: That argument is valid in regard to community of analogy taken according to a definite relation of one thing to another. In that case, one thing must be put in the definition of the other as substance is put in the definition of accident or as one thing is put into the definition of two other things because both are predicated with reference to it, as substance is put into the definition of quantity and quality.  

Reply Obj. 7: Although two species of substance have more in common than accident and substance have, it is possible that the same word is not applied to the two different species by reason of any consideration of something common between them. In that case, the word will be merely equivocal. But it is possible for a word common to substance and accident to be used because of a consideration of what they have in common. In such a case the word will not be equivocal but analogous.  

Reply Obj. 8: The word "animal" is used not to signify the external form which a picture imitates when it depicts a real animal, but to signify its internal nature, in which it is not imitated. Hence, "animal" is used equivocally of the real animal and of the one painted. But the word "knowledge" is suitable to both creature and Creator in the respect in which the creature imitates the Creator. Consequently, knowledge is not predicated of the two altogether equivocally.
