# Article 12 — Whether God knows singular future contingents

Twelth, it is asked whether God knows singular future contingents? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.14.13; I.86.4; *SCG* I.67; *Disputed Questions on Evil,* q. 16, a. 7; *Quodlibet*, bk. 11, q. 3; *Opuscula* 2, "Contra Graecos Armenos," ch. 10; *In I Sent*., d. 38, a. 5; *Commentary on Aristotle's On Interpretation*, bk. 1, lect. 14; *Compendium theologiae,* bk. 1, ch. 133.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he does not, for nothing but the true can be known, as is said in the *Posterior Analytics*. *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.2, 71b25.)* But, as said in *On Interpretation*, *(Aristotle, *On Interpretation* 1.9, 18a28.)* there is no definite truth in singular future contingents. Hence, God does not have knowledge of individual and contingent futures.  

Obj. 2: That from which the impossible would follow is impossible. But if God knew a singular future contingent, the impossible would follow, namely, that God’s knowledge would be wrong. Hence, it is impossible for him to know a singular future contingent.  

*Proof of the minor*: let us suppose that God knows some singular future contingent event, such as that Socrates is sitting. Now, either it is possible that Socrates is not sitting or it is not possible. *(Cf. Aristotle, *Topics* 8.10, 160b27; *Metaphysics* 4.2, 1004b2; Boethius, *Commentary on Aristotle's On Interpretation*, bk. 3 (PL 64:524BC).)* If it is not possible, then it is impossible for Socrates not to sit. Hence, for Socrates to sit is necessary, although what was granted was contingent. On the other hand, if it be possible not to sit, and granted he does not, nothing inconsistent follows from this. *(Aristotle, *Prior Analytics* 1.13, 32a18; cf. Aquinas, *In I Sent*., d. 38, a. 5, obj. 3.)* It would follow, however, that the knowledge of God is erroneous, and hence it would not be impossible for his knowledge to be false.  

Obj. 3: It was said, however, that the contingent, as it is in God, is necessary.  

*On the contrary*, what is in itself contingent is not necessary with respect to God, except in the way in which it is in God. But inasmuch as it is in him, it is not distinct from him. If, therefore, it is known by God only as necessary, he will not know it in the way it exists distinct from himself.  

Obj. 4: According to the Philosopher, *(Aristotle, *Prior Analytics* 1.9, 30a15.)* when the major of a syllogism expresses necessity and the minor expresses inherence, a conclusion expressing necessity follows. But the following is true: “whatever is known by God must necessarily be.” For, if what God knew as existing did not exist, his knowledge would be false. Therefore, if something is known by God to exist, it necessarily exists. But no contingent must necessarily be. Therefore, no contingent is known by God.  

Obj. 5: It was said, however, that when it is said that whatever is known by God must necessarily be, the necessity implied is not with reference to the creature but to God alone.  

*On the contrary*, when it is said that "whatever is known by God must necessarily be," the necessity is attributed to the thing for which the subject of the statement stands. Now, the subject of the statement is that which is known by God, not God himself as knowing. Therefore, the necessity implied in this statement refers only to the thing known.  

Obj. 6: The more certain our knowledge is, the less it has to do with contingents; *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.33, 88b30; *Ethics* 6.5, 1140b27–31.)* for science is only about necessary truths, since it is more certain than opinion, which may be about contingent things. Now, God’s knowledge is most certain; hence, it can be about necessary matters only.  

Obj. 7: If the antecedent of any true conditional proposition is absolutely necessary, the consequent will be absolutely necessary. *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.6, 75a1; cf. Aquinas, *In I Sent*., d. 38, a. 5, obj. 4; *ST* II-II.171.6, obj. 3.)* But the following conditional is true: "if something is known by God, it will exist." Since this antecedent, “this is known by God,” is absolutely necessary, the consequent will be absolutely necessary. Hence, whatever is known by God must necessarily exist. That this, namely, “this is known by God,” is absolutely necessary was proved as follows. This is something said about the past. But whatever is said about the past, if true, is necessary; for, since it has been, it cannot not have been. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 9.8, 1050b6.)*  

Furthermore, whatever is eternal is necessary. Now, all that God has known he has known from eternity. Therefore, that he has known is absolutely necessary. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 2.1, 993b30.)*  

Obj. 8: Everything is related to the true as it is related to the act of existence. But future contingents do not have any act of existence; therefore, neither do they have truth. Hence, there can be no certain knowledge of them.  

Obj. 9: According to the Philosopher, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 4.4, 1006b10.)* whoever does not understand one determined thing understands nothing. But if a future contingent is open to its being or not being, *(Aristotle, *On Interpretation* 1.9, 18b8.)* it is by no means determined either in itself or in its cause. Therefore, there can, by no means, be any knowledge of it at all.  

Obj. 10: Hugh of St. Victor says: *God, who has all things in himself, knows nothing outside himself.* *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments*, bk. 1, part 2, ch. 15 (PL 176:212B).)* Now, whatever is contingent is outside of him, for in him there is no potentiality. Hence, he does not know future contingents at all.  

Obj. 11: Something contingent cannot be known through a medium that is necessary; for, if the medium is necessary, the conclusion will be necessary. *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.6, 75a4; cf. Aquinas, *In I Sent*., d. 38, a. 5, obj. 4; *ST* II-II.171.6, obj. 3.)* Now, God knows all things through a medium, his own essence. Hence, since this medium is necessary, it seems that he cannot know anything contingent.  

On the contrary (1), the Psalms speak as follows: *he who hath made the hearts of every one of them; who understands all their works* (Ps 33:15)*.* But the works of men are contingent since they depend on free choice. Therefore, God knows future contingents.  

Furthermore (2), whatever is necessary is known by God. Now, every contingent is necessary inasmuch as it is related to divine cognition, as Boethius says. *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 6 (PL 63:861A).)* Therefore, every contingent is known by God.  

Furthermore (3), Augustine says: *God knows changeable things in an unchangeable manner*. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 6, ch. 10 (PL 42:932); *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 26 (PL 40:17–18).)* But if a thing is contingent, it is changeable; for a contingent is said to be that which can either be or not be. Hence, God knows contingents in an unchangeable manner.  

Furthermore (4), God knows things in so far as he is their cause. But God is the cause not only of necessary but also of contingent things. Therefore, he knows both necessary and contingent things.  

Furthermore (5), God knows all things to the extent that the model of all things is in him. But the divine model for the contingent and the necessary can be immutable, just as it is an immaterial model for the material and a simple model for the composite. Hence, it seems that just as God knows what is composite and material, although he himself is immaterial and simple, so also he can know contingents, although contingency has no place in him.  

Furthermore (6), to know is to understand the cause of a thing. Now, God knows the causes of all contingents; for he knows himself, the cause of all things. Hence, he knows contingents.  

I answer that on this question, there have been several erroneous opinions. *(Averroes, *Metaphysics*, bk. 12, comm. 51.)* Some, wishing to pronounce upon divine knowledge from the viewpoint of our own way of knowing, have said that God does not know future contingents. This opinion cannot stand, for it would eliminate providence over human affairs, which are contingent. Consequently, others have said that God has knowledge of all futures, *(The Stoics, according to *SCG* III.73; cf. Cicero, *De divinatione*, bk. 2, cc. 5–8; Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 5, cc. 8–9 (PL 41:148); Nemesius (Pseudo-Gregory of Nyssa), *On the Nature of Man*, ch. 35 (PG 40:744) .)* but that all take place necessarily, otherwise his knowledge of them would be subject to error. But neither can this opinion stand, for it would destroy free choice and there would be no need to ask advice. Moreover, it would be unjust to punish or to give rewards in proportion to merit when everything takes place necessarily. Hence, it must be said that God knows all futures; nevertheless, this does not prevent things from taking place contingently.  

As evidence of this, it should be noted that we have certain powers and cognitive habits in which there can never be falsity; for example, sense, science, and the understanding of principles. *(Cf. Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.3, 427b11–12, 428b18; *Ethics* 6.3, 1139b15.)* On the other hand, we have others in which there can be falsity; for example, imagination, opinion, and judgment. *(Cf. Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 4.5, 1010b2; *Ethics* 6.3, 1139b17.)* Now, falsity occurs in a cognitive act because something is not in reality as it is apprehended. Hence, if there is any knowing power such that there is never any falsity in it, then the thing to be known by it never falls short of what the knower apprehends about it. Now, what is necessary cannot be prevented from happening even before it happens, in view of the fact that its causes are unchangeably ordained to its production. Hence, by means of habits that are always true, what is necessary can be known even when it will happen in the future, just as we know a coming eclipse or the rising of the sun by means of true science. *(This example is from Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 8, ch. 6.)* But a contingent can be impeded before it is brought into being; for at that stage it exists only in its causes, which may be prevented from producing their effect. After a contingent has been brought into existence, however, it can no longer be prevented. Hence, such a power or habit can make about a present contingent a judgment in which falsity is never found, as sense does when it judges that Socrates is sitting when he sits. From this it is clear that a contingent can be known as future by no cognition that excludes all falsity and the possibility of falsity; and since there is no falsity or possibility of falsity in the divine knowledge, it would be impossible for God to have knowledge of future contingents if he knew them as future.  

Now, something is known as future when an order of past and future stands between the event and the knowledge. This order, however, cannot be found between the divine knowledge and any contingent thing whatsoever; but the relation of the divine knowledge to anything whatsoever is like that of present to present. This may be understood by the following example. If someone were to see many people walking successively down a road during a given period of time, in each part of that time he would see as present some of those who walk past, so that in the whole period of his watching he would see as present all of those who walked past him. Yet he would not simultaneously see them all as present, because the time of his seeing is not completely simultaneous. *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 6 (PL 63:859A).)* However, if all his seeing could exist at once, he would simultaneously see all the passers-by as present, even though they themselves would not all pass as simultaneously present. Therefore, since the vision of divine knowledge is measured by eternity, which is all simultaneous and yet includes the whole of time without being absent from any part of it, it follows that God sees whatever happens in time, not as future, but as present. For what is seen by God is, indeed, future to some other thing which it follows in time; to the divine vision, however, which is not in time but outside time, it is not future but present. Therefore, we see what is future as future because it is future with respect to our seeing, since our seeing is itself measured by time; but to the divine vision, which is outside of time, there is no future. For example, what one would see who is within the ranks of passers-by and sees only those who are in line ahead of him is quite different from what he would see were he outside their ranks and saw all of them simultaneously.  

Therefore, the fact that our sense of sight is never deceived when it sees contingents when they are present does not prevent the contingents themselves from happening contingently. In like manner, God infallibly knows all the contingents, whether they are present, past, or future to us; for they are not future to him, but he knows that they are when they are; and the fact of his knowing them does not prevent them from happening contingently. The difficulty in this matter arises from the fact that we can describe the divine knowledge only after the manner of our own, at the same time pointing out the temporal differences. For example, if we were to describe God’s knowledge as it is, we should have to say that God knows that this is, rather than that it will be; for to him every thing is present and nothing is future. For this reason, Boethius says that his knowledge of future things *is more properly called providence than foresight, since he sees them all, as it were, from a great distance, in the mirror of eternity*. *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 6 (PL 63:860B); cf. bk. 4, prose 6 (PL 63:818A).)* However, it might also be called foresight because of its relation to other things in whose regard what he knows is future.  

Reply Obj. 1: Although a contingent is not determined as long as it is, future, yet, as soon as it is produced in the realm of nature, it has a determinate truth. It is in this way that the gaze of divine knowledge is brought upon it.  

Reply Obj. 2: As was said, a contingent is referred to divine knowledge according to its act of existence in the realm of nature. Moreover, from the moment that it is, it cannot not be when it is; for, *what is must be when it is,* as is said in *On Interpretation*. *(Aristotle, *On Interpretation* 1.9, 19a23.)* It does not follow, however, that it is necessary without any qualification or that God’s knowledge is defective—just as my sense of sight is not deceived when I see that Socrates is sitting, although this fact is contingent.  

Reply Obj. 3: A contingent is said to be necessary in so far as God knows it, because he knows it, not as something already present. Nevertheless, no necessity arises from the fact that it is going to be, so that one could say that it comes about necessarily; for event applies to something which is to be, because what already is cannot eventuate. But that it has happened is true, and this is necessary.  

Reply Obj. 4: The necessity referred to in the statement, “whatever is known by God is necessary,” can concern either the manner of speaking or the thing spoken about. If the necessity is applied to the manner of speaking, then the proposition is composite and true. Its meaning will be as follows: it is necessary that "whatever is known by God exists," since it is not possible that God would know something to be and it would not be. If the necessity is applied to the thing spoken about, then the proposition is divided and false. Its meaning will be as follows: what is known by God must necessarily exist. But, as is clear from what has been said, things do not happen necessarily simply because God knows them. One might object that this distinction is valid only in regard to forms, such as whiteness and blackness, which can succeed one another in a subject, but that since it is impossible for something once known by God later not to be known by him, this distinction does not apply here. However, we reply that, although God’s knowledge does not change but always remains the same, the condition according to which a thing is referred to his knowledge does not always remain the same with respect to that knowledge. For a thing is related to God’s knowledge as it is in its own present existence, yet present existence does not always belong to it. Hence, we can consider the thing either together with its condition of being present or without it, and, consequently, we can consider it either in the manner in which it is referred to God’s knowledge or in some other manner. In this way, the afore-mentioned distinction is valid.  

Reply Obj. 5: If this proposition concerns the thing, then it is true that necessity is applied to the thing itself which is known by God; but if it concerns the manner of speaking, then the necessity is not applied to the thing but to the relation of his knowledge to the thing known.  

Reply Obj. 6: Neither our science nor God’s knowledge can be about future contingents. This would be even more true if he knew them as future. He knows them, however, as present to himself and future to others. Therefore, the objection does not stand.  

Reply Obj. 7: There have been many opinions about this. Some say that the antecedent, “this is known by God,” is contingent because, although it refers to something in the past, it nevertheless implies a relation to the future, and therefore is not necessary. For example, when it is said, “this was going to happen,” the was does not mark the event as necessary, since what was going to happen could have failed to do so; for, as is said in *Generation and Corruption*: *he who is about to walk, will not walk.* *(Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 2.11, 337b7.)* This argument, however, is invalid; for when one says, “this is future” or “this was future,” one designates the ordination of the causes of that thing to its production. Now, although it is possible that the causes ordained to a certain effect can be impeded in such a way that the effect will not follow from them, it is not possible to prevent their having been at some time ordained to produce this effect. Hence, even if that which is future should be able not to happen in the future, it will never be able at any time not to have been a future.  

For this reason, others *(Bonaventure, *In I Sent*., d. 38, a. 2, q. 2.)* say that this antecedent is contingent since it is composed of a necessary and a contingent; for God’s knowledge is necessary, but what is known by him is contingent, and each of these is included in the antecedent mentioned in the difficulty. For example, the following are contingent: “Socrates is a white man,” or “Socrates is an animal and he runs.” However, this argument, too, is invalid, for the truth of a proposition is not affected by the necessity and contingency of that which is affirmed materially in a proposition. The truth of a proposition is determined only by the principal composition. Hence, the same character of necessity and contingency is found in each of the following: “I think that man is an animal” and “I think that Socrates is running.” Consequently, since the principal act signified in the antecedent, “God knows Socrates is running,” is necessary, no matter how contingent the thing may be which is affirmed materially, this still does not prevent the afore-mentioned antecedent from being necessary.  

Hence, others *(We have not found this citation; cf. *ST* I.14.13, ad 2.)* simply concede that the antecedent is necessary. Yet, they add, from the fact that an antecedent is absolutely necessary, it need not follow that the consequent is absolutely necessary, unless the antecedent is the proximate cause of the consequent. If it is the remote cause, the necessity of the effect can be impeded by the contingency of the proximate cause. For example, even though the sun is a necessary cause, the flowering of a tree, its effect, is contingent; for its proximate cause, the tree’s germinating power, is not constant. This argument, however, does not seem to be sufficient; for it is not due to the nature of the cause and effect that a necessary consequence follows from a necessary antecedent, but rather to the relation that the consequent has to its antecedent. For the contrary of the consequent can by no means stand with the antecedent. And this would happen if a contingent consequent followed from a necessary antecedent. This relationship must be found in any true conditional, whether the antecedent is the effect, the proximate cause, or the remote cause. Moreover, if this relationship is not found in the conditional, the proposition is not true at all. Therefore, this conditional is also false: “if the sun moves, the tree will flower.”  

Hence, the difficulty must be solved differently: the antecedent is necessary without any qualification, and the consequent is absolute necessary in the way in which it follows from the antecedent. For what is attributed to a thing in itself is quite different from what is attributed to a thing in so far as it is known. What is attributed to it in itself belongs to it according to its own manner; but what is attributed to a thing or follows upon it in so far as it is known is according to the manner of the knower. Hence, if, in the antecedent, something is signified which pertains to knowledge, the consequent must be taken according to the manner of the knower, not according to the manner of the thing known. For example, were I to say, “if I understand something, that thing is without matter,” what is understood need be immaterial only in so far as it is understood. Similarly, when I say, “if God knows something, it will be,” the consequent should not be taken according to the mode of being of the thing in itself but according to the mode of the knower. For, although a thing in itself is future, it is present according to the mode of the knower. Consequently, we should rather say, “if God knows something, it is,” than say, “it will be.” We must, therefore, judge in the same way the proposition, “if God knows something, it will be,” and this one, “if I see Socrates running, Socrates is running”; for both are necessary as long as the action is going on.  

Reply Obj. 8: Although a contingent does not exercise an act of existence as long as it is a future, as soon as it is present it has both existence and truth, and in this condition stands under the divine vision. God, however, also knows the relation of one thing to another, and in this way he knows that a thing is future in regard to another thing. Consequently, there is no difficulty in affirming that God knows something as future which will not take place, inasmuch as he knows that certain causes are inclined toward a certain effect which will not be produced. But when we talk in this way we are not speaking of that knowledge of the future by which God sees things in their causes, but of that by which he sees a thing in itself. In this latter type of knowledge a thing is known as present.  

Reply Obj. 9: The future, in so far as it is known by God, is present; hence, it is determined to one or the other member of a contradiction. But as long as it is future it remains open to either.  

Reply Obj. 10: It is true that God knows nothing outside himself, if the word "outside" refers to that by *which* he knows. However, God does something outside himself if this refers to *what* he knows. This point was discussed above. *(Above: a. 3, ad 10.)*  

Reply Obj. 11: There are two types of mediums for knowledge. One, the medium of demonstration, must be proportionate to the conclusion, so that, when it has been posited, its conclusion is posited. God is not such a medium for the knowledge of contingents. The other medium of knowledge is that which is a likeness of the thing known; and the divine essence is a medium of this sort. However, it is not equated with anything, even though it is a proper medium for singulars, as was said above. *(Above: a. 4, ad 2; a.5, ad 9.)*
