# Article 2 — Whether God knows or understands himself

Second, it is asked whether God knows or understands himself? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.14.2; *Commentary on the Metaphysics*, bk. 12, lect. 11; *Commentary on the Book of Causes*, lect. 12; *Compendium theologiae*, ch. 30; *SCG* I.47–48.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he does not, for a knower is related to the thing known because of his knowledge. Now, as Boethius says: *the essence accounts for the divine unity, and the relations account for the multiplicity of the Trinity of persons*. *(Boethius, *On the Trinity*, ch. 6 (PL 64:1255A).)* In God, therefore, the thing known must be personally distinct from the knower. Furthermore, the distinction of persons in God will not permit a reciprocal predication *(Cf. Peter of Spain, *Summulae logicales*, tract. 8, n. 3.)*—the Father is not said to have generated himself because he generated the Son. Consequently, we cannot grant that God knows himself.  

Obj. 2: In the book *On the Causes* we read: *everyone knowing his own essence returns to it by a complete return*. *(*Book of Causes*, prop. 15 [14].)* But God does not return to his essence, since he never leaves it; and there cannot be a return if there has been no departure. God, therefore, does not know his own essence and does not know himself.  

Obj. 3: Knowledge is an assimilation of a knower to a thing known. But nothing is similar to itself, for, as Hilary says: *likeness is not referred to oneself*. *(Hilary of Poitiers, *On the Trinity*, bk. 3, para. 23 (PL 10:92B).)* Hence, God does not know himself.  

Obj. 4: Scientific knowledge is only about universals. *(Cf. Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.31, 87b38; *On the Soul* 2.5, 417b22.)* But God is not a universal, for every universal is bad by abstraction. There can be no abstraction from God, however, since he is perfectly simple. Hence, God does not know himself.  

Obj. 5: If God knew himself scientifically, he would understand himself, since understanding is more simple than scientific knowledge and, for this reason, is the more to be attributed to God. But God does not understand himself; hence, he does not know himself scientifically.  

*Proof of the minor*: Augustine says: *whatever understands itself comprehends itself*. *(It is actually Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 15 (PL 40:14; CCSL 44A).)* However, only finite being can be comprehended, as Augustine clearly shows in the same passage. *(It is actually Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 15 (PL 40:14; CCSL 44A).)* Therefore, God does not understand himself.  

Obj. 6: Augustine argues as follows: *our intellect does not wish to be infinite, although it is able so to wish, since it desires to know itself.* *(Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 15 (PL 40:15; CCSL 44A).)* Hence, what wishes to know itself does not wish to be infinite. But God wishes to be infinite, since he is infinite; for, if he were something he did not wish to be, he would not be supremely happy. Consequently, he does not wish to be known to himself and, hence, does not know himself.  

Obj. 7: The answer was given that, although God is simply infinite and wills to be such, he is not, however, infinite but finite to himself, and so does not will that he be infinite.  

*On the contrary*, as is pointed out in the *Physics,* *(Aristotle, *Physics* 3.4, 204a3.)* something is said to be infinite if it is untraversable, finite if it is traversable. But, as is proved in the *Physics,* *(Aristotle, *Physics* 6.7, 237b23.)* the infinite cannot be traversed by means of either a finite or another infinite being. Therefore, although God is infinite, he cannot be finite to himself.  

Obj. 8: What is a good to God is simply good. Therefore, what is finite to God is simply finite. But God is not simply finite. Hence, he is not finite to himself.  

Obj. 9: God knows himself only in so far as he enters into a relation with himself. Therefore, if he were finite to himself, he would know himself in a finite manner; but, since he is infinite, he would be knowing himself other than he is and, consequently, have false knowledge of himself.  

Obj. 10: Of those who know God, one knows him more than another, according as his manner of cognition surpasses that of the other. But God knows himself infinitely more than any one else knows him. Hence, his manner of knowing is infinite, he know himself infinitely, and is not finite to himself.  

Obj. 11: St. Augustine proves that one person cannot understand a thing more than another can. He argues as follows: *whoever knows a thing otherwise than as it is, is deceived, and anyone who is deceived about a thing does not understand it. Hence, whoever understands anything otherwise than as it is does not understand it; for nothing can be understood in any other way than as it is*. *(Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 32 (PL 40:22; CCSL 44A).)* Since a thing exists in one manner, it is known in one manner by all. Hence, no one understands a thing more than another does. Therefore, if God were to understand himself, he would not understand himself more than others understand him. Thus, in some respect a creature would be equal to his Creator; *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 3, d. 14, ch. 1.)* this, however, would be absurd.  

On the contrary, Dionysius declares: *by knowing itself, the divine wisdom knows all else*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:869B).)* Hence, God knows himself especially.  

I answer that when it is said that a being knows itself, it is implicitly said to be both the knower and the known. Hence, in order to consider what kind of knowledge God has of himself, we have to see what kind of a nature it is that can be both knower and known.  

Note, therefore, that a thing is perfect in two ways. First, it is perfect with respect to the perfection of its act of existence, which belongs to it according to its own species. But, since the specific act of existence of one thing is distinct from the specific act of existence of another, in every created thing of this kind, the perfection falls short of absolute perfection to the extent that that perfection is found in other species. Consequently, the perfection of each individual thing considered in itself is imperfect, being a part of the perfection of the entire universe, which arises from the sum total of the perfections of all individual things. In order that there might be some remedy for this imperfection, another kind of perfection is to be found in created things. It consists in this, that the perfection belonging to one thing is found in another. This is the perfection of a knower in so far as he knows; for something is known by a knower by reason of the fact that the thing known is, in some fashion, in the possession of the knower. Hence, it is said in *On the Soul* that the soul is, *in some manner, all things*, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.8, 431b21.)* since its nature is such that it can know all things. In this way it is possible for the perfection of the entire universe to exist in one thing. The ultimate perfection which the soul can attain, therefore, is, according to the philosophers, *(Cf. Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 9, ch. 7; Algazel, *Metaphysics* 1.1.)* to have delineated in it the entire order and causes of the universe. This they held to be the ultimate end of man. We, however, hold that it consists in the vision of God; for, as Gregory says: *what is there that they do not see who see him who sees all things*? *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues*, bk. 4, ch. 33 (PL 77:376B).)*  

Moreover, the perfection of one thing cannot be in another according to the determined act of existence which it has in the thing itself. Hence, if we wish to consider it in so far as it can be in another, we must consider it apart from those things which determine it by their very nature. Now, since forms and perfections of things are made determinate by matter, a thing is knowable in so far as it is separated from matter For this reason, the subject in which these perfections are received must be immaterial; for, if it were material, the perfection would be received in it according to a determinate act of existence. It would, accordingly, not be in the intellect in a state in which it is knowable, that is, in the way in which the perfection of one thing can be in another.  

Hence, those ancient philosophers *(Cf. *ST* I.84.2.)* erred who asserted that like is known by like, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 1.2, 405b15; 404b17.)* meaning by this that the soul, which knows all things, is materially constituted of all things: its earth knows the earth, its water knows water, and so forth. They thought that the perfection of the thing known had the same determined act of existence in the knower as it had in its own nature. But the form of the thing known is not received in this way in the knower. As the Commentator remarks, *(Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 5.)* forms are not received in the potential intellect in the same way in which they are received in first matter, for a thing must be received by a knowing intellect in an immaterial way. For this reason, we observe, a nature capable of knowing is found in things in proportion to their degree of immateriality. Plants and things inferior to plants can receive nothing in an immaterial way. Accordingly, they are entirely lacking in the power of knowing, as is clear from *On the Soul*. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.12, 424a32; bk. 3, comm. 66.)* A sense, however, can receive species without matter although still under the conditions of matter; *(Cf. Avicenna, *On the Soul*, bk. 2, ch. 2.)* but the intellect receives its species entirely purified of such conditions. There is likewise a hierarchy among knowable things; for, as the Commentator says, *(Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 5 and 18; *Metaphysics*, bk. 2, comm. 1.)* material things are intelligible only because we make them intelligible; they are merely potentially intelligible and are made actually intelligible by the light of the agent intellect, just as colors are made actually visible by the light of the sun. *(Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 5 and 18.)* But immaterial things are intelligible in themselves. Hence, although less known to us, they are better known in the order of nature.  

Since God, being entirely free of all potentiality, is at the extreme of separation from matter, it follows that he is most knowing and most knowable. It follows, too, that the knowability of his nature is directly proportioned to the act of existence which it exercises. Finally, because God is by reason of the fact that he possesses his own nature, it follows that God knows to the extent that he possesses his nature as one most knowing. For this reason Avicenna says: *he himself knows and apprehends himself because his own quiddity, being completely stripped,* that is, of matter, *is that of a thing perfectly identified with himself*. *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 8, cc. 6–7.)*  

Reply Obj. 1: In God, the Trinity of persons gets its plurality from the real relations in him, namely, the relations of origin. When one says “God knows himself,” the relation connoted is not a real relation but a rational relation, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 5.9, 1018a9.)* for, whenever a thing is referred to itself, the relation is not real but merely rational. A real relation demands two terms.  

Reply Obj. 2: The dictum stating that one who knows himself returns to his essence is metaphorical. For, as shown in the *Physics,* *(Aristotle, *Physics* 7.3, 247a28.)* there is no motion in intellection, and hence, properly speaking, no departure or return. Intellection is said to be a progression or movement to the extent that in it one passes from one thing known to another. In us, this takes place by a sort of discourse; and so, when the soul knows itself, there is a departure from the soul and a return to it. For the act, going out from the soul, first terminates in the object. Then one reflects upon the act, and finally upon the power and the essence, in so far as acts are known from their object, and powers by their acts. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.4, 415a18.)* In divine cognition, however, there is, as was pointed out above, *(Above: a. 1, ad 4.)* no progression from the known to the unknown. Nevertheless, from the point of view of the thing known, one can find a certain cycle in God’s knowledge; for in knowing his own essence he beholds all other things, and in these things he sees a likeness of his own essence. Hence, in some way he may be said to return to his own essence—not, however, in the sense that he knows his essence only from other things, as is the case with our soul. Note, however, that in *The Book of Causes* the return to one’s own essence is called the very subsistence of a thing in itself; *(*The Book of Causes*, comm. 15 [14].)* for non-subsistent forms are, as it were, poured out upon something other than themselves, and are not in possession of themselves. But subsistent forms reach out to other things, perfecting them and influencing them—in such a way, however, that they still retain their immanence and self-possession. In this way, God returns to his essence in the highest degree, for he provides for all, and, because of this providence, in a sense he goes forth and out into all things, although in himself he remains unmoved and uncontaminated by anything else.  

Reply Obj. 3: A likeness which is a real relation demands a distinction of things. If it is merely a conceptual relation, a distinction of reason between the things which are similar is sufficient.  

Reply Obj. 4: A universal is intelligible in direct proportion to its separation from matter. Hence, those things which have not been separated from matter by an act of our intellect but are, in themselves, free from all matter, are most knowable. Consequently, God is most knowable, even though he is not a universal.  

Reply Obj. 5: God knows, understands, and comprehends himself, although, absolutely speaking, he is infinite. He is not infinite privatively—as a quantity is infinite, *(Aristotle, *Physics* 1.2, 185b2.)* having part after part ad infinitum. If such an infinite had to be known according to the formal character of its infinity, one could never comprehend it; one could never come to its end, for it does not have an end. But God is said to be negatively infinite since his essence is not limited by anything. Now, every form received in a subject is limited according to the capacity of the subject; but since the divine act of existence is not received in a subject, for he is his own act of existence, his act of existence is infinite and, for that very reason, his essence is said to be infinite. The knowing power of every created intellect is finite, since it is received in some subject. Consequently, our intellect cannot come to know God as clearly as he is capable of being known. Accordingly, our intellect cannot comprehend him, for it cannot attain that fullness of knowledge which is the meaning of comprehend, as was mentioned above. *(Above: a. 1, ad 3.)* But the divine essence and its knowing power possess the same infinity, and God’s knowledge is just as powerful as his essence is great. Consequently, he attains a perfect knowledge of himself and is thus said to have comprehensive knowledge—not because such comprehension imposes some limits on the thing known, but rather because the knowledge is perfect and there is nothing lacking to it.  

Reply Obj. 6: Since our intellect is finite in its nature, it cannot comprehend or perfectly understand anything infinite. Augustine’s reasoning proceeded on the assumption of this limited nature. The nature of the divine intellect, however, is different; so the argument does not follow.  

Reply Obj. 7: If the word God, properly speaking, is given its full meaning, he is finite neither to himself nor to others. He is said to be finite to himself merely because he knows himself as a finite intellect knows a finite thing; for, just as a finite intellect can attain a complete knowledge of a finite thing, so the divine intellect can have a complete knowledge of God himself. But that characteristic of the infinite by which its end can never be reached is proper to a privative infinite. But this is entirely beside the point.  

Reply Obj. 8: In regard to those perfections which involve quantity, if anything in reference to God has a certain attribute, the consequence is that it has that attribute absolutely. Thus, whatever is great in reference to God is, as a consequence, simply great. But in regard to those terms which involve imperfection, the same thing does not follow. If, for instance, something is small in comparison with God, it is not necessarily, as a consequence, small absolutely. All things are, indeed, nothing in comparison with God, yet they are not absolutely nothing. *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 1, d. 8, ch. 1.)* What is good in the sight of God, therefore, is good absolutely; but it does not follow that what is finite for God is finite absolutely, because finite involves imperfection, but good expresses a perfection. In either case, however, anything which is found in the divine judgment to have a certain attribute has that attribute absolutely.  

Reply Obj. 9: The statement, “God knows himself limitedly,” can be understood in two ways. In the first way, limitedly is applied to the thing known, so that God would know himself to be limited. In this sense the statement is incorrect, for then God’s knowledge would be false. In the second way, limitedly is applied to the knower. Then, two interpretations are possible. Either limitedly means perfectly, so that the knower is said to know limitedly whose knowledge attains its end and, in this sense, God actually does know himself “limitedly”; or limitedly pertains to the efficacy of cognition—and in this sense God knows himself, not limitedly, but infinitely, for the extent of the power of his cognition is the infinite itself. However, from the fact that he is finite to himself in the manner described, one cannot conclude that his knowledge of himself is limited, except in the sense in which this was said to be true.  

Reply Obj. 10: That argument is based on the word "infinite" being taken as referring to the efficacy of knowledge. Consequently, it is clear that God does not know himself finitely.  

Reply Obj. 11: The statement that one person can understand more than another may be taken in two ways. In the first, the word "more" refers primarily to the thing known. In this sense, no one of those who understand understands more than another of the thing understood, provided that it is understood; for whoever attributes more or less to the thing known than is in the nature of the thing is in error and does not, properly speaking, understand. But the word "more" can also be taken as referring to the manner in which one knows. In this sense, one understands more than another because he understands more clearly—as an angel understands more clearly than a man, and God more than an angel, because of a greater power of understanding. We must similarly distinguish another phrase assumed in this proof, that is, “to know a thing other than as it is.” For, if the word "other" refers primarily to the thing known, then no one who understands knows a thing other than it is; for this would be to understand it to be in some other way than it is. If the word "other," however, refers to the manner by which one knows, then everyone who understands a material thing knows it other than it is, because a thing having a material act of existence is understood only in an immaterial way.
