# Article 3 — Whether Christ had other knowledge of things than that by which he knows them in the Word

Third, it is asked whether Christ had other knowledge of things than that by which he knows them in the Word? *(Parallel texts: Above: a. 2; *ST* III.12.1; *In III Sent*., d. 14, a. 1, qa. 5; *ST* III.9.3; *Compendium Theologiae*, ch. 216.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he does not, for as is said in the first Epistle to the Corinthians 13:10: *but when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be put away*. But the knowledge by which we now know things in themselves is in part, as we read in that same passage. Therefore, when the perfect knowledge of glory comes, our present knowledge will be put away, as the Apostle expressly seems to mean. But, in Christ, from the first moment of his conception there was the knowledge of glory, that is to say, that knowledge by which he knew things in the Word. Therefore, he had no other knowledge of things.  

Obj. 2: It was said that, when glory comes, knowledge will be put away, not in its essence but in the mode in which the understanding now sees by inquiry and dependence on phantasms. *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 3, d. 31, ch. 2.)*  

*On the contrary*, this mode is of the essence of knowledge. And, if something essential is taken away, the substance, of the thing cannot remain. Therefore, if that mode leaves, the knowledge cannot remain in its substance.  

Obj. 3: According to the Philosopher, *(Aristotle, *Ethics* 2.2, 1104a27.)* all habits which are acquired from acts are the source of acts like those from which they are acquired. But the knowledge which we now have was acquired from the kind of consideration in which we turn to phantasms and proceed by making comparisons. Therefore, knowledge like this can produce only acts of this nature. So, the knowledge would remain useless if such a mode of knowledge were discontinued.  

Obj. 4: It is impossible to have two forms of the same species in one and the same subject. But, when the soul of Christ sees things in the Word, it has likenesses of the things it sees, since a thing is seen only through its likeness. Therefore, it is impossible for it to have other likenesses of the same things. So, there cannot be another knowledge in Christ except that by which he knows things in the Word.  

Obj. 5: Knowledge is ascribed to the soul of Christ because of its perfection. But, since the soul of Christ sees things in the Word and sees the Word itself, it is not more or less perfect whether it has other knowledge or not. Therefore, we should not ascribe any other knowledge to him.  

*Proof of the minor*: this premise is from Augustine, who says: *unhappy the man who knows all those things [creatures], and does not know you. Blessed the man who knows you, even if he does not know those things. However, one who knows both you and them is not more blessed because of them, but only blessed because of you*. *(Actually, this quote is from Augustine, *Confessions*, bk. 5, ch. 4 (PL 32:708). according to *ST* I. q. 12, a. 8. ad. 4.)*  

On the contrary (1), Christ was more perfect than the angels, as the Apostle proves (Heb 1:4–14). But, besides knowledge of things which they have in the Word, angels have knowledge of things in their own nature, as is clear from Augustine. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 4, ch. 22 (PL 34:312).)* Therefore, with much greater reason the soul of Christ knew things in their own nature besides knowing them in the Word.  

Furthermore (2), it is not fitting that any of the natural perfections should be lacking in Christ. But it is a natural perfection of the human soul to know things in their own nature. Therefore, Christ had this kind of knowledge of things.  

I answer that as we said before, *(Above: a. 1.)* the perfection which belongs to Christ supernaturally does not exclude his natural perfection, just as uncreated life does not exclude a soul which gives life. But the knowledge by which the soul of Christ knows the Word and things in the Word is supernatural, as has been said. *(Above: a. 2.)* Hence, this does not prevent the soul of Christ from having every natural perfection. However, to be reduced to act is the natural perfection of anything which is existing in potency. But the potential intellect is naturally in potency to intelligible things. Consequently, before it is reduced to act, it is imperfect, and it is made perfect when it is reduced to act and so has knowledge of things. Therefore, some philosophers, *(Cf. Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 9, ch. 7; Algazel, part 1, prop. 1.)* looking at man’s natural perfection, have said that the ultimate happiness of man consists in the delineation of the order of the whole universe in the soul of man. Therefore, Christ had this perfection of knowing things in their own nature through the infused knowledge given him by God, much more than man in the state of innocence or angels by reason of their natural knowledge.  

Reply Obj. 1: There are two opinions about knowledge. *(Opinions cited by Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 1 Corinthians*, at 1 Cor 13:10 (PL 191:1661–1662).)* One says that science acquired here remains as far as the essence of the habit is concerned, but the mode in which we use science in this life is taken away. The subsumption in the [second] difficulty proceeds according to this opinion. Nevertheless, we must add that, since Christ was a wayfarer and a possessor *(On the words *comprehensor* and *viator*, see William of Auxerre, *Summa aurea*, bk. 3, tract. 11, q. 2.)* of the term, he had both modes of thinking, one in which he was like the angels, in that he knew things without discursive thought, and the other through which he knew by turning to phantasms. And it is proper to Christ to have both modes of knowledge, for it belongs to him simultaneously to be a wayfarer and possessor of the term. The other opinion, however, holds that knowledge acquired here will be taken away in so far as the essence of the habit is concerned. According to this (although I do not believe it is true), one could answer that the soul of Christ did not have knowledge acquired from the senses but infused knowledge such as the angels have through species created with them. It is clear that such knowledge remains in angels along with the vision of glory.  

Reply Obj. 2: This mode of knowing is not essential because of itself, but by reason of its subject, for which this is the normal mode of understanding according to the state of this life. But all that is essential to knowledge in itself is that through it things which can be known are known. Therefore, when the condition of the subject is changed, the mode of knowing is changed, although the habit of knowledge is not.  

Reply Obj. 3: An act can be like another act in two ways. In one way, they are alike in the species of the act which it derives from the matter it concerns. According to this, an acquired habit always produces an act similar to the act by which it was generated. Thus, one becomes brave by doing brave deeds, and, when he has become brave, does brave deeds. In the other way, they are alike according to the mode which follows the disposition of the subject. And, according to this, it is not necessary for the acts in question to be alike. For it is clear that the acts by which we acquire political bravery are performed with sadness and without pleasure. But acts which follow a habit are rather easy and are accompanied by pleasure, or at least are without sadness. Hence, in knowledge we see that man acquires knowledge of things by considering some things, and can consider these same things once he knows them. Nevertheless, he does this in a different way than he did before, for he no longer investigates but looks at what he has investigated. Thus, there is nothing to prevent acts which are produced by habits in the state of glory from having a different mode.  

Reply Obj. 4: As far as it is said to know in the Word, the soul of Christ and any other soul has no other likenesses than the Word itself for the things which it knows in the Word. However, from the fact that it sees in the Word, it can form for itself likenesses of the things it sees, as one who sees something in a mirror sees the thing through the form of the mirror. We have discussed this more fully in our treatment of the angels. *(Above: q. 8, a. 5.)*  

Reply Obj. 5: Man’s beatitude consists in the knowledge of God and not in the knowledge of creatures. Hence, one is more blessed not because of knowledge of creatures but only because of the knowledge of God. Nevertheless, it is still true that knowledge of creatures belongs to the natural perfection of the soul, as has been said.
