# Article 1 — Whether there are ideas in God

Ideas are the object of our inquiry. First, it is asked whether there are ideas in God? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.15.1; I.44.3; *In I Sent*., d. 36, q. 2, a. 1; *Commentary on Dionysius' On the Divine Names*, ch. 5, lect. 3; *Commentary on Metaphysics*, bk. 1, lect. 15.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that there are no ideas in him, for God’s knowledge is most perfect. Now, knowledge had from the essence of a thing is more perfect than knowledge had from its likeness. Consequently, God knows things, not by means of their likenesses, but by means of their essences. Hence, those likenesses of things which are called ideas do not exist in God.  

Obj. 2: But it was said that God knows things more perfectly by knowing them through his essence, which is a likeness of things, than he would if he knew them through their own essences.  

*On the contrary*, knowledge is an assimilation to the thing known. Hence, the more the medium of knowing resembles and is united with the thing known, the more perfectly is the thing known by means of that medium. But the essence of created things is more united with things than the divine essence is. Consequently, God would know things more perfectly if he knew them by means of their essences than he does by knowing them through his own essence.  

Obj. 3: But it was said that the perfection of knowledge consists in the union of the medium of knowledge with the knower, not with the thing known.  

*On the contrary*, the species of a thing, which is in the intellect, is rendered individual by the act of existence it has in the intellect; but in relation to the thing known it has the character of a universal, since it is a likeness of the thing according to its common nature and not according to its particular conditions. Yet the knowledge which is made possible by means of that species is not singular but universal. Hence, knowledge follows the relation of the species to the thing known rather than its relation to the knower.  

Obj. 4: The Philosopher criticizes Plato’s theory of ideas because the latter asserted that the forms of material things existed without matter. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 1.9, 991a8.)* Now, these forms would exist without matter to a much greater extent were they in the divine intellect instead of being outside of it, because the divine intellect is the acme of immateriality. Therefore, it is much more inconsistent to say that ideas exist in the divine intellect.  

Obj. 5: The Philosopher criticizes Plato’s theory of ideas because the ideas he posited can neither generate nor be generated, and hence are useless. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 7.8, 1033b26.)* But, if the ideas are said to be in the divine mind, they also will not be generated—because whatever is generated is composite—nor will they generate, for, since whatever is generated is composite and whatever generates resembles what is generated, that which generates must also be composite. Hence, it would be inconsistent to say that there are ideas in the divine mind.  

Obj. 6: Dionysius says that God *knows existing things by means of the non-existing, and that he does not know them by means of ideas*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:869A).)* But the only reason for affirming the existence of ideas in God is so he can know things by their means. Hence, ideas do not exist in God’s mind.  

Obj. 7: Whatever has been modeled upon an archetype is proportionate to it. But there is no proportion of a creature with God, just as there is no proportion between what is finite and what is infinite. Therefore, in God there cannot be any archetypes of creatures; consequently, since ideas are exemplary forms, it seems that ideas of things do not exist in God.  

Obj. 8: Ideas are the rule of knowledge and action. But that which cannot err in its knowledge or action does not need a rule for either; and, since God is this kind of being, it seems out of place to say that there are ideas in him.  

Obj. 9: We read in the *Metaphysics* that just as being one in quantity causes equality, so being one in quality causes resemblance. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 5.15, 1021a11.)* Now, because of the difference between God and a creature, a creature can in no way be said to be equal to God, nor can God be said to be equal to a creature. Therefore, there is nothing in God that resembles a creature. Consequently, since "idea" means a likeness of a thing, it seems that there are no ideas of things in God.  

Obj. 10: If ideas are in God, they are there only for the production of creatures. But Anselm says: *it is sufficiently clear that in the Word, through which all things have been made, likenesses of things do not exist. Only the one simple essence is present*. *(Anselm, *Monologion*, ch. 31 (PL 158:185B).)* Therefore, it seems that ideas, which are called the likenesses of things, do not exist in God.  

Obj. 11: God knows himself in the same way in which he knows other things; otherwise, his knowledge would be multiple and divisible. Now, God does not know himself by means of an idea. Therefore, he does not know other things by means of ideas.  

On the contrary (1), Augustine says: *whoever denies that there are ideas is an infidel, since he denies the existence of the Son.* *(Citation not found; cf. William of Auxerre, *Summa aurea*, bk. 1, in appendix; Bonaventure, *In I Sent*., d. 6, q. 3; Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 46 (PL 40:30); *Retractions*, bk. 1, ch. 3 (PL 32:589).)* Therefore.  

Furthermore (2), every intellectual agent possesses within himself a plan of his work; otherwise, he would not know what he was doing. But God acts through his intellect, and he is not ignorant of what he is doing. Therefore, there exist within him intelligible characters of things, and these are called ideas.  

Furthermore (3), as is said in the *Physics: the three causes, namely, the efficient, final, and formal causes, are ultimately identical*. *(Aristotle, *Physics* 2.7, 198a24.)* Now, God is the efficient and final cause of things. Hence, he is also their formal cause —but as an exemplary cause, since he cannot be a form that is part of a creature. We conclude as before.  

Furthermore (4), a particular effect is not produced by a universal cause unless the universal cause is proper or appropriated. Now, all particular effects are from God, who is the universal cause of all things. Hence, they should come from him in so far as he is the proper or appropriated cause of each and every one of them. But this would not be possible unless the intelligible characters of things existed in him. Hence, the intelligible characters of things, that is, ideas, must exist in him.  

Furthermore (5), Augustine says: *I regret that I said that there are two worlds, one the object of sense, the other the object of intellect—not because this is not true, but because I said it as though it were an original idea, when in fact it had been previously pointed out by philosophers, and because this manner of speaking is not usual in Holy Scripture*. *(Augustine, *Retractions*, bk. 1, ch. 3 (PL 32:588).)* Now, the intelligible world is nothing other than the idea of the world. Hence, it is true that there are ideas.  

Furthermore (6), speaking to God, Boethius says: *you have drawn all things from the highest pattern, having in your mind the glorious world—you, the most glorious of all*. *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 3, verse 9 (PL 63:758).)* Therefore, the pattern of the world, and of all that is in the world, is in God; and our conclusion is the same as before.  

Furthermore (7), in the Gospel according to John 1:3–4, we read: *what was made in him was life*. This means, as Augustine says, *(Augustine, *Tractates on the Gospel of John*, tract. 1, para. 17 (PL 35:1387; CCSL 36).)* that all creatures are in the divine mind as a piece of furniture is in the mind of a cabinetmaker. Now, a piece of furniture is in the mind of a cabinetmaker by means of its idea and likeness. Therefore, ideas of all things are in God.  

Furthermore (8), a mirror does not lead us to the knowledge of things unless their likenesses are reflected in it. Now, the uncreated Word is a mirror that leads to the knowledge of all creatures, because by the Word the Father utters himself and all other things. Therefore, likenesses of all things are in the Word.  

Furthermore (9), Augustine says: *the Son is the Father’s art, containing the living forms of all things*. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 6, ch. 10 (PL 42:931).)* Now, those forms are nothing other than ideas. Therefore, ideas exist in God.  

Furthermore (10), Augustine says that there are two ways of knowing things: through an essence and through a likeness. *(Augustine, *Confessions*, bk. 10, ch. 17 (PL 32:790).)* Now, God does not know things by means of their essence, because only those things which are present in the knower are known in this manner. Therefore, since he does know things, as is clear from what has been said previously, *(Above: q. 2, a. 3.)* he must know them by means of their likenesses. Hence, our conclusion is the same as before.  

I answer that as Augustine says, *we can literally translate ιδεαι as species or forms*. *(Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 46 (PL 40:30; CCSL 44A).)* Now, the "form" of a thing has three meanings. First, it can mean that "from which" a thing gets its form, as when we say that the informing of an effect proceeds from the form of the agent. Now, an action does not necessarily result in effects that attain the complete character of the form of the agent, for effects often fall short of this, especially in the case of equivocal causes. Consequently, the form "from which" something gets its form is not said to be its idea or form. Second, the form of a thing can mean that "by which" a thing is informed, as when we say that the soul is the form of man, and the shape of a statue is the form of the bronze. Now, although form, which is part of the composite, is truly said to be the form of a thing, we do not usually call it its idea, because it seems that the word "idea" signifies a form separate from that whose form it is. Third, the form of a thing can mean that "according to which" a thing is informed. This is the exemplary form in imitation of which a thing is made. It is in this meaning that "idea" is ordinarily used. Hence, the idea of a thing is the form which a thing imitates.  

Note, however, that a thing can imitate a form in two ways. It can imitate it because of the agent’s intention, as an artist makes his painting imitate someone whose portrait he is making. It happens at times, however, that such an imitation is not intentional, but happens by chance or by accident. For example, painters frequently paint something resembling someone when they have not intended to do so. Now, what imitates a form by chance is not said to be formed according to that form, because "according to" seems to imply direction to an end. Hence, since the exemplary form or idea is that according to which a thing is formed, the exemplary form or idea should imitate something intentionally, not accidentally. We see also that a thing acts because of an end in two ways. The agent himself may determine his end—and this is true of all intellectual agents—or the end of the agent may be determined by another principal agent. For example, the flight of an arrow is toward a definite end, but this end is determined by the archer. Similarly, an operation of a nature which is for a definite end presupposes an intellect that has pre-established the end of the nature and ordered it to that end. For this reason, every work of nature is said to be a work of intelligence. Consequently, if a thing imitating something else comes into existence through an agent which has not itself determined the end, the form imitated will not have the character of an exemplar or idea merely because of what has happened. For example, we do not say that the form of the man who generates is the idea or exemplar of the man who is generated; but we use these terms only when an agent acting for an end has determined the end himself—whether the form imitated be within him or outside of him. For we say that the form of art in the artist is the plan or idea of the artistic product, and we also say that a form outside the artist is a plan if he imitates it when he makes a thing. This, therefore, seems to constitute the character of an idea: it must be a form which something imitates because of the intention of an agent who antecedently determines the end himself.  

Consequently, it is clear that those who say that all things happen by chance cannot admit the existence of ideas. This opinion, however, is criticized by philosophers, *(Cf. Aristotle, *Physics* 2.8, 198b34.)* because things which happen by chance do not happen uniformly, but happen only in a few instances. We see, however, that the course of nature always, or at least in most cases, proceeds in an uniform manner. Similarly, those who say that all things proceed from God by a necessity of nature and not by a decision of will cannot admit ideas, because those who act impelled by the necessity of nature do not determine the end for themselves. This cannot be the case here, however, because, if a thing acts for an end but does not determine that end itself, it has its end determined for it by something else superior to it; and thus there would be a cause superior to God. This, of course, is impossible, since all those who speak of God understand him to be the first cause of beings. For these reasons, Plato affirmed the existence of ideas, avoiding the opinion of the Epicureans, *(Cf. Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 1.6, 987a29; Cicero, *On the Nature of the Gods*, bk. 1, ch. 24; Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 18, ch. 41 (PL 41:601); *Epistle 118*, "Ad Dioscorum," ch. 28 (PL 33:445); Nemesius, *On the Nature of Man*, ch. 44 (PG 40:795B); Boethius, *Commentary on Aristotle's On Interpretation*, bk. 3 (PL 64:491B, 513B); Moses Maimonides, *Guide for the Perplexed*, bk. 3, ch. 18.)* who asserted that everything happens by chance, and that of Empedocles *(Cf. Aristotle, *Physics* 2.4, 196a20.)* and others who asserted that everything happens because of a natural necessity. This reason for affirming ideas, namely, on account of the previous planning of the works that are to be done, is suggested by Dionysius, who says: *we say that exemplars in God are the intelligible characters of things that come to be, the individually pre-existing causes of subsistent beings. These, theology calls ‘predefinitions.’ They predetermine and cause godly and good inclinations in creatures. It is according to these that the super-substance predefines and produces all things*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 5, para. 8 (PG 3:824C).)* However, because an exemplary form or idea has, in some sense, the nature of an end, and because an artist receives the form by which he acts—if it is outside of him—we cannot say that the divine ideas are outside of God. They can be only within the divine mind, for it is unreasonable to say that God acts on account of an end other than himself or that he receives that which enables him to act from a source other than himself.  

Reply Obj. 1: The perfection of knowledge can be considered either with reference to the knower or with reference to the thing known. When it is said, therefore, that knowledge by means of an essence is more perfect than that had by means of a likeness, this is to be understood as referring to what is known. For that which is knowable in itself is, in itself, known more than that which, not knowable in itself, is known only in so far as it is in a knower by means of its likeness. In this sense, it is not inconsistent to say that created things are less knowable than the divine essence, which is knowable by its very nature.  

Reply Obj. 2: Two things are required for a species which is a medium of knowledge. First, it must represent the thing known. This belongs to a species in so far as it approaches the nature of what is known. Second, it must have a spiritual or immaterial act of existing. This belongs to a species in so far as it has its act of existing in the knower. For this reason, a thing is known better by means of an intellectual species than by means of the species in sense, since the former is more immaterial. Similarly, a thing is known better by means of the species in the divine mind than it could be known by means of its own essence—even granting that the essence of a thing could be the medium of knowledge despite its materiality.  

Reply Obj. 3: Two elements of knowledge must be considered. First, we must consider its nature; and this is determined by the relation of the species to the intellect in which it exists. Second, we must consider the determinate character which the knowledge has with respect to its object; and this follows the relation that the species has to the thing itself. Hence, the more similar the species is as a representation to the thing known, the more determinate is the knowledge; and the more it approaches immateriality, which belongs to the nature of the knower in so far as he knows, the more efficacious it is in the production of knowledge.  

Reply Obj. 4: It is contrary to the nature of natural forms that they should be immaterial in themselves; but it is not inconsistent for them to acquire immateriality from the one in whom they exist. Consequently, in our intellects, the forms of natural things are immaterial. Hence, while it would be incorrect to assert that ideas of natural things have a separate subsistence, it would be correct to say that they are in the divine mind.  

Reply Obj. 5: Strictly speaking, the ideas existing in the divine mind neither generate nor are generated, but rather create or produce things. Hence, Augustine says: *although they themselves neither begin nor cease to be, nevertheless, whatever can begin or cease to be is said to be informed according to them*. *(Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 46 (PL 40:30).)* Nor is it necessary, when composite things are made, for the first efficient cause to resemble what is generated: this is true only of the proximate efficient cause. Since Plato asserted that the ideas are the proximate principle of generation, *(Cf. Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 1.9, 991b3.)* the argument mentioned in the difficulty is directed against him.  

Reply Obj. 6: Dionysius wished to say merely that God does not know by means of an idea received from things or in such a manner that he would know a thing differently by means of an idea. For this reason, another translation of this passage reads: *nor does he by his vision come into contact with individual things.* *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:869A).)* Hence, from this argument, it is not impossible for ideas to exist.  

Reply Obj. 7: Although there can be no proportion between God and a creature, there can be a proportionality, as we have previously shown. *(Above: a. 3, ad 4; a. 11; q. 2, a. 2.)*  

Reply Obj. 8: Just as God does not need an essence other than his act of existence, because he cannot not be, neither does he need a norm other than himself, because he cannot know or act in a way that would be faulty. The reason for this perfection is that he is his own norm, just as the reason for the necessity of his existence is that his essence is his act of existence.  

Reply Obj. 9: In God there is no dimensional quantity on whose basis an equality could be established. There is in him, however, quantity after the manner of intensive quantity. For example, whiteness is said to be "great" when it attains the perfect fullness of its nature. The intensity of a form, moreover, refers to the manner in which that form is possessed. Now, although that which is divine may in some way be passed on to creatures, we can never grant that a creature possesses it in the same way in which God possesses it. Hence, although we grant that there exists a likeness between a creature and God in some way, we do not grant that they are equal in any way whatsoever.  

Reply Obj. 10: As will be evident to one who carefully considers Anselm’s words, Anselm means to say merely that in the Word there exists no likeness drawn from things themselves, but, instead, all the forms of things are taken from the Word. Accordingly, he means that the Word is not a likeness of things, but things are imitations of the Word. Consequently, this argument does not dispense with the ideas, since an idea is a form which something imitates.  

Reply Obj. 11: The statement that God knows himself in the same way in which he knows other things is true if we are speaking about the way of knowing with reference to the knower. It is not true, however, if we are speaking about the way of knowing with reference to the thing known, because the creature which is known by God is not the same in the real order as the medium by which God knows. But he himself is really the same as it. Consequently, it does not follow that there is multiplicity in his essence.
