# Article 8 — Whether all material creatures are governed by God's providence through angels

Eighth, it is asked whether all material creatures are governed by God’s providence through angels? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.22.3; I.103.6; I.110.1; *SCG* III.76–78, 83, 94; *Compendium theologiae*, cc. 124, 130-131; *On Separated Substances*, ch. 14.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that they are not, for in Job 34:13 we read: *what other has he appointed over the earth? or whom has he set over the world which he has made*? In his commentary on this passage, Gregory says: *by himself, indeed, he rules that world who has created it by himself.* *(Gregory the Great, *Morals on the Book of Job*, bk. 24, ch. 20 (PL 76:314B); bk. 34, ch. 26; see also *Glossa ordinaria*, at Job 34:13, 3.320.)* Consequently, God does not rule material creatures through the mediation of spirits.  

Obj. 2: Damascene says that *it is inconsistent to say that one person makes a thing and another rules over it*. *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 29 (PG 94:964A).)* But, without any medium, God alone creates material creatures. Therefore, he governs them without any intermediaries.  

Obj. 3: Hugh of St. Victor says that God’s providence is his predestination, which is the highest wisdom and the highest goodness. *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments*, bk. 1, part 2, ch. 9 (PL 176:210); bk. 4, part 2, ch. 9.)* Now, the highest good or wisdom is not communicated to any creature. Therefore, neither is providence. Hence, God does not provide for material creatures through the mediation of spiritual creatures.  

Obj. 4: Material creatures are ruled by providence in so far as they are directed to an end. But bodies are ordained to their end through their natural operations in accordance with their determinate natures. Therefore, since the natures of natural bodies are made determinate, not by spiritual creatures, but directly by God, it seems that they are not governed through the mediation of spiritual substances.  

Obj. 5: Augustine distinguishes between two types of providential operations: natural and voluntary. The former he calls *natural because it makes trees and plants grow*; the latter he calls *voluntary because it takes place through the deeds of angels and men*. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 8, ch. 9 (PL 34:379).)* It is clear, therefore, that all material things are ruled by the natural operation of providence, not through the mediation of angels, as would be true were they ruled by voluntary operation.  

Obj. 6: What is attributed to one person because of his dignity does not belong to another who does not have a similar dignity. Now, Jerome writes: *great is the dignity of souls, each of whom has an angel appointed to guard it*. *(Jerome, *Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew*, bk. 3, ch. 18 (PL 26:135A); see Peter Lombard, *Sentences,* bk. 2, d. 11, ch. 1.)* This dignity, however, is not found in material creatures; consequently, they are not committed to the providence and direction of angels.  

Obj. 7: The effects and due courses of these material bodies are frequently hindered. This would not happen if they were governed by the mediation of angels, because these obstacles would then occur either with the consent of the angels—and this is impossible, since it would be contrary to that for which angels were appointed, namely, the government of natures according to its due order—or they would occur against the angels’ will—and this, too, is impossible, since the angels would not be in the state of beatitude if something could happen to them which they did not want to happen. Therefore, material creatures are not ruled through the mediation of spiritual creatures.  

Obj. 8: The more noble and powerful a cause is, the more perfect is its effect. Now, lower causes can produce such effects as can be kept in existence even after the operation of their efficient cause ceases; for example, a knife continues in existence even after the work of the cutler has ceased. Much more so, then, will the effects of God’s power be able to exist by themselves without being provided for by any efficient cause. Consequently, they do not need to be ruled through angels.  

Obj. 9: The divine goodness has created the whole world in order to manifest itself; for, as we read in Proverbs 16:4: *the Lord has made all things for himself*. Now, God’s goodness, as Augustine also says, *(Augustine, *Against Enemies of the Law and the Prophets,* bk. 1, ch. 4 (PL 42:606).)* is manifested more by a diversity of natures than by a number of things all possessing the same nature. For this reason, God did not make all creatures rational or all of them to exist in themselves. He made some creatures irrational, and some, like accidents, that exist in others. Consequently, it seems that for the greater manifestation of himself God created not only creatures that needed the rule of another, but also some creatures that needed no rule at all. Hence, our position stands.  

Obj. 10: There are two types of acts in creatures, first act and second act. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.1, 412a10; 412a22; cf. Avicenna, *On the Soul*, bk. 1, ch. 1; Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 2, comm. 5.)* First act is the form and the act of existence that a form gives. Form is called the primarily first act, existence, the secondarily first act. Second act, however, is operation. Now, the first act of corporeal things comes directly from God. Therefore, their second acts are also caused directly by God. But the only way in which one thing governs another is by being in some manner the cause of its operations. Therefore, material creatures of this sort are not governed through the instrumentality of spirits.  

Obj. 11: According to Augustine, *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 4, ch. 33 (PL 34:317).)* God simultaneously created a world that was perfect in all its parts in order that his power might be better shown. The praiseworthiness of his providence would similarly be even better shown if he were to govern all things directly. Therefore, he does not govern material things through the mediation of spirits.  

Obj. 12: There are two ways of governing. One way is to impart light or knowledge; this is the way in which a teacher rules his class, and a ruler, his city. The other way is to impart motion to a thing; this is the way in which a pilot guides his ship. Now, spiritual creatures do not govern material creatures by imparting light or knowledge, because these material things cannot receive knowledge, nor do they govern them by imparting motion, because, as is proved in the *Physics,* a mover must be joined to what he moves, *(Aristotle, *Physics* 7.2, 243a3.)* and spiritual substances are not joined to these lesser material bodies. Consequently, the latter are not governed in any way through their mediation.  

Obj. 13: Boethius says: *through himself alone God disposes all things*. *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 3, prose 12 (PL 63:779A).)* His disposition of material things, therefore, does not take place through spirits.  

On the contrary (1), Gregory says: *in this visible world, nothing can be disposed except through invisible creatures.* *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues*, bk. 4, cc. 5–6 (PL 77:329B).)*  

Furthermore (2), Augustine writes: *all material things are ruled in a definite order through the spirit of life.* *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 3, cc. 4–5 (PL 42:873).)*  

Furthermore (3), Augustine also says: *God does certain things himself, as illuminating and beatifying souls. Other things he does through creatures who serve him. These, in proportion to their merit and according to inviolable laws, are ordained to care even for sparrows, even for the beauty of the grass of the fields, indeed, even for the number of hairs on our heads—and to all this divine providence extends.* *(Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, qq. 53, 62 (PL 40:36; CCSL 44A).)* Now, the creatures ordained to serve God’s inviolable decrees are the angels; consequently, it is through them that he governs material things.  

Furthermore (4), on Numbers 22:21, *so Balaam rose in the morning, and saddled*, Origen writes in the Gloss: *the world needs the angels, who rule over beasts, preside over the birth of animals, and over the growth of bushes, plants, and other things.* *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Numbers 22:21, 1:1335; Origen, *Commentary on Numbers*, homily 14, para. 2 (PG 12:680B).)*  

Furthermore (5), Hugh of St. Victor says: *the ministry of angels rules not only over the life of men but also over the things that are related to their life.* *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments*, bk. 1, part 5, ch. 34 (PL 176:263A).)* Now, all material things are ordained for men’s use. Consequently, all things are governed through the mediation of angels.  

Furthermore (6), in a co-ordinated series, the earlier members act on the later members. The later do not act on the earlier. But spiritual substances are prior to material, since they are closer to the first principle. Therefore, the action of spiritual substances governs material actions, and the opposite is not true.  

Furthermore (7), man is said to be a “microcosm” because the soul rules the human body as God rules the whole universe. *(Aristotle, *Physics* 8.2, 252b26.)* In this respect, the soul is called “an image of God” more than angels are. *(Aquinas, *In II Sent*., d. 16, q. 1, a. 3; *ST* I.93.3.)* Now, our soul governs the body through the mediation of certain spirits which are spiritual in comparison with the body, although material in comparison with the soul. Consequently, God also rules material creatures through the mediation of spiritual creatures.  

Furthermore (8), our soul exercises certain operations directly, for example, understanding and willing; but it exercises other operations mediately by using bodily organs as instruments, as, for example, in the operations of the sensitive and vegetative soul. God also exercises certain operations directly, such as the beatifying of souls and the other actions he performs in relation to the highest substances. Consequently, some of God’s operations will also take place in the lowest substances through the mediation of the highest ones.  

Furthermore (9), the first cause does not take away the operation of a second cause, but, as is clear from what is said in *On the Causes,* *(*Book of Causes*, comm. 1.)* it strengthens it. Now, if God were to govern all things immediately, second causes would have no operations of their own. God, therefore, rules lower beings through higher beings.  

Furthermore (10), in the universe there is something, such as the ultimate constituents of bodies, which is ruled but does not rule. There is something, such as God, which is not ruled but rules. *(Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 5, ch. 9 (PL 41:151).)* Therefore, there will exist something that both rules and is ruled—a medium between both types. Consequently, God rules lower creatures through the mediation of higher.  

I answer that as Dionysius and Augustine say, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names* ch. 4, paras. 1–4 (PG 3:693–99C); *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 4; Augustine, *On Christian Doctrine*, bk. 1, ch. 32 (PL 34:32); *Enchiridion on Faith, Hope, and Charity*, ch. 23 (PL 40:244).)* the divine goodness is the cause of things’ being brought into existence, for God wished to communicate his goodness to others as far as this was possible to creatures. God’s goodness, however, has a twofold perfection. We can consider it in itself as it contains all perfections in itself in a supereminent way, or we can consider it as it flows into things, that is, as it is the cause of things. It was fitting, therefore, that God’s divine goodness should be communicated to creatures in both ways so that because of this goodness created things not only would exist and possess goodness but also would give existence and goodness to other things, just like the sun’s outpoured rays, which not only illumine other bodies but also make them to be sources of light, too. However, the following order is kept: those that most resemble the sun receive the most of its light and, consequently, have sufficient light not only for themselves but also to pour out on other things. Similarly, in the ordering of the universe, as a result of the outpouring of God’s goodness, superior creatures have not only that by which they are good in themselves, but also that by which they are the cause of goodness for other things which participate the least in God’s goodness. These last-named things participate in the divine goodness merely in order to exist—not to be the cause of other things. And this is the reason, as Augustine and the Philosopher say, why that which is *active is always more noble than that which is passive*. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 12, ch. 16 (PL 34:467); Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.5, 430a18.)* Now, among the superior creatures, the closest to God are those rational ones that exist, live and understand in the likeness of God. Consequently, God in his goodness gives them the power not only of pouring out upon other things but also of having the same manner of outpouring that he himself has—that is, according to their will, and not according to any necessity of their nature. Hence, God governs inferior creatures both through spiritual creatures and through the more noble material creatures. He provides through material creatures, not by making them provident themselves, but by making them active. He governs through spiritual creatures, however, by making them provident themselves. But even in rational creatures an order can be found. Rational souls hold the lowest place among these, *(Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 5, 17.)* and their light is shadowy *(Isaac Israeli ben Solomon, *Liber de definitionibus*.)* in comparison with that of the angels. Consequently, as Dionysius says, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 12, para. 2 (PG 3:292C); ch. 15.)* their knowledge is more restricted, and their providence is likewise restricted to a few things, namely, to human affairs and practical matters of human life. But the providence of angels is universal and extends to all material creation. Consequently, both saints *(Above: s.c. 1–3.)* and philosophers *(Nemesius, *On the Nature of Man*, ch. 44 (PG 40:794A); Aquinas, ST I.110.1, ad. 3; Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 12.9, 1073a32; Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 9, cc. 3–4.)* say that all corporeal things are governed by divine providence through the mediation of angels. We must differ with the philosophers, however, in this, that some of them *(Plato, from Macrobius, *Commentary on the Dream of Scipio*, bk. 1, ch. 14; *Book of Causes*, comm. 3; Algazel, *Metaphysics*, part 1, tract. 5; Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 9, ch. 4.)* say that corporeal things are not only cared for by angels but are also created by them. This opinion is contrary to faith. *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 3 (PG 94:873B).)* We should follow, instead, the opinion of the saints who hold that corporeal things of this sort are administered by the providence of angels through motion only; that is, the angels move the higher bodies, and these motions cause the motions of the lower.  

Reply Obj. 1: An exclusive statement regarding an agent does not exclude the operation of an instrument; it merely excludes another principal agent. Hence, if one were to say, “Socrates alone makes a knife,” not the operation of his hammer but only the operation of another carpenter is excluded. Similarly, when it is said that God governs the world by himself, this does not exclude the operation of inferior causes, which God uses as instrumental means. All that is excluded is government by another principal ruler.  

Reply Obj. 2: The governing of a thing pertains to its direction to an end. The ordination of a thing to an end, however, presupposes its act of existing; but its act of existing presupposes nothing else. Consequently, creation, by which all things are brought into existence, is the operation of the only cause that presupposes no other cause by which it is kept in existence. Government, however, can be one of those causes that do presuppose other causes, so it is not necessary for God to create through the mediation of certain causes through whose instrumentality he governs.  

Reply Obj. 3: What creatures receive from God cannot exist in them in the same manner in which it exists in him. Consequently, this difference becomes apparent when names are applied to him. Those names that express some perfection absolutely are common also to creatures; but those that express both a perfection and its manner of existing in God are not common to creatures, for example, omnipotence, supreme wisdom, and supreme goodness. It is clear, therefore, that even though supreme goodness is not communicated to a creature, providence can be communicated to it.  

Reply Obj. 4: Even though that establishment of nature by which material things receive a tendency to an end comes directly from God, their motion and action can take place through the instrumentality of angels, just as natures in seeds possess their undeveloped nature from God alone but, by the providence of a farmer, are helped to develop into act. *(Cf. Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 3, cc. 8–9 (PL 42:875–79); *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 9, ch. 15 (PL 34:404).)* Consequently, just as a farmer supervises the growth of the crops in his fields, so do angels direct the entire activity of material creation.  

Reply Obj. 5: Augustine divides the operation of natural providence from that of voluntary providence by considering the proximate principles of their operations; and nature is the proximate principle of some operations of divine providence, while the will is that of others. But the remote principle of all providential action is the will, at least the divine will. The argument, therefore, proves nothing.  

Reply Obj. 6: Just as all material bodies lie under God’s providence but God’s care is nevertheless said to be only for men because of the special kind of providence he has for them, so also, even though all material bodies are subject to the rule of angels, nevertheless, because of the dignity of men’s souls, angels are appointed to guard men in a very special way.  

Reply Obj. 7: Just as the will of God as ruler is not opposed to defects in things but, instead, allows or permits them, so is the same entirely true of the wills of angels, which are perfectly conformed to the divine will.  

Reply Obj. 8: As Avicenna says, *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 6, cc. 1–2.)* no effect can remain if its proper cause is removed. Now, certain inferior causes are causes of becoming; others are causes of existing. A cause of becoming is that which educes a form from the potentiality of matter by means of motion, such as a cutler who is the efficient cause of a knife. A cause of a thing’s existing, however, is that upon which the act of existence of a thing essentially depends, as the existence of light in the air depends upon the sun. Now, if the cutler is removed, the becoming of the knife ceases, but not its existence. However, if the sun is taken away, there ceases the very existence of the light in the air. Similarly, if God’s action ceases, the existence of a creature utterly ceases, since God is the cause not only of a thing’s becoming but also of its existence.  

Reply Obj. 9: That condition cannot possibly be in a creature; that is, a creature cannot have an act of existence without someone keeping it in that act. It is repugnant to the very notion of a creature; for a creature, because it is a creature, has an act of existence that is caused, and, consequently, it depends on something else.  

Reply Obj. 10: More things are required for second act than for first act. Hence, it is not unreasonable that something should be the cause of another’s motion and operation, even though it is not the cause of its act of existence.  

Reply Obj. 11: The breadth of God’s providence and goodness is manifested more clearly in his governance of inferior beings through superior beings than if he were to govern all things directly. For in this kind of government, as is clear from what has been said, the perfection of God’s goodness is communicated in more than one regard.  

Reply Obj. 12: A spiritual creature governs a material one by giving it motion. This does not necessitate that spiritual creatures be joined to all bodies, but only to those which they move directly, namely, the first bodies. Spiritual creatures, moreover, are not joined to these bodies by being their forms, as some have held, *(The Platonists, according to Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 8, ch. 16 (PL 41:241); Origen, *On First Principles* [*Peri archon*], bk. 1, ch. 7 (PG 11:173), according to Jerome, *Contra Joannem Hierosolymitanum*, para. 17 (PL 23:385); Jerome, *Commentary on Ecclesiastes,* at Eccl 1:6 (PL 23:1068); *Glossa ordinaria*, at Eccl 1:6, 3.1753; Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 10, ch. 1.)* but by being their movers.  

Reply Obj. 13: When something is said to take place through another, the preposition through implies that it is a cause of the operation. Now, since an operation stands halfway between the one doing the work and the work that is done, through can imply a cause of the operation in so far as this cause issues in a result. In this sense it is said that something takes place through an instrument. Through can also, however, signify a cause of the operation in so far as the operation comes from the one operating. In this sense we say that something takes place through the form of the agent. Now, here it is not the instrument which is the cause of the agent’s action, but his form or some superior agent is the cause. However, an instrument can be the cause of the result which receives the agent’s action. Consequently, when we read that God disposes all things through himself alone, through denotes the cause of his divine disposition in so far as it comes from God who is disposing. In this sense, God is said to dispose through himself alone, because he is not moved by any superior disposing him; and he disposes, not through any extrinsic form, but only through his own goodness.
