# Article 4 — Whether the motions and actions of all bodies here below are subject to divine providence

Fourth, it is asked whether the motions and actions of all bodies here below are subject to divine providence? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.22.2; I.103.5; *SCG* III.1, 64, 75, 94; *In I Sent*., d. 39, q. 2, a. 2; *Compendium theologiae*, cc. 123, 130, 132; *On Separate Substances*, cc. 13–15; *Commentary on Dionysius' On the Divine Names,* ch. 3, lect. 1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that they are not, for God does not provide for a thing if he is not its author, because, as Damascene says, *it is illogical to say that one person makes a thing and another provides for it*. *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 29 (PG 94:964A).)* Now, God is not the author of evil, *(Augustine, *Book of Eighty-Three Different Questions*, q. 21 (PL 40:16; CCSL 44A).)* for to the extent that things come from him they are good. Therefore, since many evil things happen in the actions and motions of creatures here below, it does not seem that all of their motions fall under his divine providence.  

Obj. 2: Motions that are contrary do not seem to belong to the same order. Now, in creatures here below there are contrary motions and actions. Consequently, it is impossible that they all fall under the order of divine providence.  

Obj. 3: A thing falls under divine providence only inasmuch as it is directed to an end. But evil is not ordered to an end. *(Augustine, *On the Nature of the Good*, ch. 4 (PL 42:553).)* On the contrary, it is a privation of order. Consequently, evil does not fall under providence. In creatures here below, however, many evils occur. Therefore.  

Obj. 4: A man is not prudent if he allows something evil to occur in those things whose actions fall under his providence when he can prevent that evil from taking place. Now, God is most prudent and powerful. Hence, since many evils occur in creatures here below, it seems that certain of their acts do not fall under divine providence.  

Obj. 5: It was said, however, that God permits these evils to happen because he can draw good from them. *(Augustine, *Enchiridion on Faith, Hope, and Charity*, ch. 11 (PL 40:236).)*  

*On the contrary*, good is more powerful than evil, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 31 (PG 3:732B).)* so it is easier to draw good from good than good from evil. Consequently, it is not necessary for God to permit evil to happen in order to draw good from it.  

Obj. 6: As Boethius says, *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 4, prose 6 (PL 63:817B, 820B).)* just as God creates all things through his goodness, so does he also govern all things by his goodness. But his divine goodness does not permit him to make anything evil. Consequently, his goodness does not permit anything evil from coming under his providence.  

Obj. 7: If a thing is arranged, it does not happen by chance. Therefore, if all the motions of creatures here below were arranged, nothing would happen by chance, but everything would happen by necessity. This, however, is impossible.  

Obj. 8: As the Commentator says, *(Averroes, *Physics*, bk. 2, comm. 75.)* if everything happened in creatures here below because of the necessity of matter, they would not be ruled by providence. But many things in creatures here below happen because of the necessity of matter. At least these events, then, are not ruled by providence.  

Obj. 9: No prudent man permits a good so that evil will result. For the same reason, therefore, no prudent man permits an evil that good will result. Since God is prudent, he will therefore not permit evils in order that good will result. Consequently, it seems that the evils occurring in creatures here below are not allowed by providence.  

Obj. 10: What is blameworthy in a man should by no means be attributed to God. But a man is blamed if he does wrong in order to get something good. This is clear from the Epistle to the Romans 3:8: *as we are slandered, and as some affirm that we say: let us do evil, that there may come good*. Consequently, it is contrary to God’s nature for evil to come under his providence in order that good may be drawn from it.  

Obj. 11: If the acts of bodies here below were subject to God’s providence, they would act in harmony with God’s justice. But the lower elements do not act in this way: fire burns the homes of the just as well as those of the unjust. Consequently, acts of lower bodies do not fall under God’s providence.  

On the contrary (1), in the Gospel according to Matthew 10:29, we read: *are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and not one of them shall fall on the ground without your Father.* On this, the Gloss reads: *great is the providence of God. Not even the smallest things escape it*. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Matthew 10:30, 5.199.)* Consequently, even the smallest movement of things here below comes under God’s providence.  

Furthermore (2), Augustine writes as follows: *it is because of God’s providence that we see celestial bodies ordered from on high, stars and planets of the earth shining down on us below, the regular alternation of night and day, the rugged earth being cleansed by surrounding waves of water, air gushing out in the heavens, shrubs and animals being conceived and born, growing, wasting away, and killing, and all things else that happen by interior, natural motion*. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 8, ch. 9 (PL 34:379).)* Consequently, all motions of lower bodies fall under God’s providence.  

I answer that since the first principle of things is the same as their final end, things come from their first principle and are ordered to their ultimate end in the same manner. Studying things as they come from their principle, however, we find that those which are close to their principle have an unfailing act of existence, but, as is said in *Generation and Corruption,* *(Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 2.10, 336b30.)* those that are remote from their principle have a corruptible act of existence. Consequently, with respect to their relation to an end, those things that are closest to their ultimate end unfailingly keep their direction to their end, but those that are remote from their ultimate end sometimes diverge from their direction to it. Moreover, the same things that are close to their principle are close to their end, and those that are remote from their principle are remote from their end. Consequently, not only have incorruptible substances an unfailing act of existence, but also their actions never fail to keep their direction to an end. For example, there are heavenly bodies whose motions never leave their natural orbit. However because corruptible bodies have defective natures, many of their movements diverge from their proper order. It is for this reason that, in regard to the order of the universe, the Philosopher compares incorruptible bodies to children in a household who always do what is good for the home, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 12.10, 1075a19.)* and corruptible bodies to domestic animals and slaves whose actions frequently violate the order laid down by the one in charge of the household. This is the reason, too, why Avicenna says that nothing evil lies beyond the moon and that there is evil only in creatures here below. *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 11, ch. 6; bk. 4, ch. 6.)*  

It should not be thought, however, that those acts of things here below which are outside their proper course are entirely outside the order of providence. For a thing comes under God’s providence in two ways: it can be something to which something else is ordered or it can be something that is ordered to something else. Now, as said in the *Physics* and in the *Metaphysics,* *(Aristotle, *Physics* 2.3, 194b35; *Metaphysics* 5.2, 1013a35.)* in an order of means to an end, all the intermediate members are ends as well as means to an end. Consequently, whatever is rightly ordered by providence comes under providence not only as something that is referred to something else, but also as something to which another thing is referred. However, a thing which leaves the right order comes under providence only as something referred, to something else, not as something to which another thing has been referred. For example, the act of the generative powers by which a man generates another complete in his nature is directed by God to a particular thing, namely, a human form; and to the act itself something else is directed, namely, the generative power. A defective act which results occasionally in the generation of natural monstrosities is, of course, directed by God to some useful purpose; but to this defective act itself nothing else was directed. It happened merely on account of the failure of some cause. With regard to the first-named act of generation, the providence is one of approval; with regard to the second, it is one of permission. These two kinds of providence are discussed by Damascene. *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 29 (PG 94:965A).)*  

It should be noted, however, that some have restricted God’s providence to only the species of natural things, *(*Opinion of certain Peripatetics* according to Aquinas, *Commentary on Dionysius's On the Divine Names*, ch. 3, lect. 1; *Commentator expressly asserts this opinion in* Metaphysics *11* [Averroes, *Metaphysics*, bk. 11, comm. 37, 52], according to Aquinas, *In I Sent*., d. 39, q. 2, a. 2, resp.)* and have excluded it from individuals except as they participate in a common nature. They did this because they did not admit that God knows singulars, but said that God directs the nature of a species in such a way that the resultant power of a species can bring about a certain action, and, if this should fail at times, the failure itself is directed to something useful—just as the corruption of one thing is directed to the generation of another. *(Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 1.3, 318a23.)* They denied, however, that a particular force is directed to a particular act and that this particular failure is directed to this particular use. But since we say that God knows all particular things perfectly, we assert that all individual things, even as individuals, fall under God’s providence.  

Reply Obj. 1: That argument touches only the providence of approval. It is true, however, that God does not provide for a thing unless he is in some way its author. Consequently, since evil does not come from God, it does not fall under his providence of approval, but falls only under his providence of permission.  

Reply Obj. 2: Although contrary motions do not belong to the same specific order, they do belong to one general order, as do even the different orders of different crafts which are subordinated to the order of a city.  

Reply Obj. 3: Even though evil inasmuch as it issues from its own cause is without order and, for this reason, is defined as a privation of order, there is nothing that keeps a higher cause from ordering it. In this way evil comes under providence.  

Reply Obj. 4: Any prudent man will endure a small evil in order that a great good will not be prevented. Any particular good, moreover, is trifling in comparison with the good of a universal nature. Again, evil cannot be kept from certain things without taking away their nature, which is such that it may or may not fail; and, while this nature may harm something in particular, it nevertheless gives some added beauty to the universe. Consequently, since God is most prudent, his providence does not prevent evil, but allows each thing to act as its nature requires it to act. For, as Dionysius says, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 33 (PG 3:733B).)* the role of providence is to save, not to destroy, nature.  

Reply Obj. 5: There are certain goods which can be drawn only from certain evils; for example, the good of patience can be drawn only from the evil of persecution, and the good of penitence only from the evil of sin. This, however, is not to deny that evil is weak in comparison with good, because things of this sort are drawn out of evil, not as from an essential cause, but, as it were, accidentally and materially.  

Reply Obj. 6: Inasmuch as it has an act of existence, whatever is made must have the form of the one who makes it, because the making of a thing terminates in its act of existence. Consequently, an evil cannot be produced by a cause that is good. Now, providence directs a thing to an end, and this direction to an end follows upon the act of existence of the thing. It is not impossible, therefore, for something evil to be directed to a good by one who is good, but it is impossible for one who is good to direct something to an evil. For, just as the goodness of a maker puts the form of goodness in the things he makes, so also does the goodness of one who is provident put a direction to good in the things that are subject to his providence.  

Reply Obj. 7: Effects happening accidentally in creatures here below can be considered in two ways: in their relation to proximate causes—and, in this sense, many things happen by chance—or in their relation to the first cause—and, in this sense, nothing in the world happens by chance. It does not follow, therefore, that all things happen necessarily, because in necessity and contingency effects do not follow first causes but proximate causes.  

Reply Obj. 8: Those things resulting from the necessity of matter are themselves determined by natures ordered to an end, and for this reason can also fall under divine providence. This would not be possible if everything resulted from the necessity of matter.  

Reply Obj. 9: Evil is the contrary of good. Now, of itself no contrary brings about its contrary, but every contrary brings its contrary to that which is similar to itself. For example, heat does not bring a thing to coldness, except accidentally. Instead, it reduces cold to warmth. Similarly, no good person directs a thing to evil; instead, he directs it to good.  

Reply Obj. 10: As is clear from the above discussion, to do evil is in no way proper to those who are good. To do evil for the sake of a good is blameworthy in a man and cannot be attributed to God. On the other hand, to direct evil to a good is not opposed to one’s goodness. Hence, permitting evil in order to draw some good from it can be attributed to God. *(There is no reply to objection 11.)*
