# Article 9 — Whether divine providence disposes bodies here below by means of the celestial bodies

Ninth, it is asked whether divine providence does dispose bodies here below by means of the celestial bodies? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.22.3; I.115.3; *SCG* III.82; *In II Sent*., d. 15, q. 1, a. 2; *Compendium theologiae*, ch. 127.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for speaking of celestial bodies, Damascene writes as follows: *we say, however, that they do not cause generation or corruption.* *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 7 (PG 94:893B).)* Since bodies here below are subject to generation and corruption, they are consequently not disposed through celestial bodies.  

Obj. 2: It was said, however, that the celestial bodies are not called the causes of bodies here below merely because they do not introduce any necessity into them.  

*On the contrary*, if an effect of a heavenly body on bodies here below is impeded, this must have been caused by some condition in the lower bodies. Now, if the lower bodies are ruled by the heavenly bodies, then that obstructing condition must be traced to some influence of a heavenly body. Consequently, no impediment could arise from bodies here below unless it were due to an exigency of the celestial bodies. Therefore, if the celestial bodies rule the lower, and if the motions of the celestial bodies are necessary, they will introduce necessity into the lower bodies.  

Obj. 3: For an action to be completed, all that is needed is something active and something passive. Now, both active and passive natural powers are found in bodies here below. Therefore, no power of a celestial body is needed for their actions. Consequently, bodies here below are not ruled through the instrumentality of celestial bodies.  

Obj. 4: According to Augustine, *(Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 5, ch. 9 (PL 41:151).)* there are three types of things: first, things that are acted upon but do not act, as are bodies; second, things that act but are not acted upon, as is God; third, things that both act and are acted upon, as are spiritual substances. Now, celestial bodies are simply corporeal. Consequently, they do not have the power of acting upon bodies here below. Hence, the latter are not disposed through their instrumentality.  

Obj. 5: If a celestial body acts upon bodies here below, either it acts upon them in so far as it is a body, that is, through its material form, or it acts upon them through something else. Now, a celestial body does not act in so far as it is a body, because this kind of action can be found in all bodies; and this explanation seems unlikely from what Augustine says. *(Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 5, ch. 9 (PL 41:151).)* Consequently, if it does act upon lower bodies, its action is due to something else; and, in this case, it should be attributed to an immaterial power and not to the heavenly bodies. Hence, the conclusion is the same as before.  

Obj. 6: What does not belong to what is prior does not belong to what is subsequent. Now, as the Commentator says, *(Averroes, *De substantia orbis*, cc. 1–2.)* material forms presuppose indeterminate dimensions in matter. However, dimensions are not active, because quantity is not an active principle. Therefore, material forms are not active principles, and so no body can do anything except through an immaterial power existing within it. Consequently, the conclusion is the same as before.  

Obj. 7: Explaining this statement made in *On the Causes: every noble soul has three operations,* *(*Book of Causes*, prop. 3.)* a commentator *(*Book of Causes*, comm. 3.)* declares that the soul acts on nature by means of a divine power existing within it. A soul, however, is much more noble than a body. Hence, neither can a body do anything to the soul except by means of a divine power within it. Consequently, our original position stands.  

Obj. 8: That which is more simple is not moved by what is less simple. But seminal principles in the matter of bodies here below are more simple than the material power of the heavens, because the power of the latter is diffused in matter while that of the seminal principles is not. Therefore, the seminal principles in bodies here below cannot be moved by the power of a celestial body. Hence, bodies here below are not governed in their motions by celestial bodies.  

Obj. 9: Augustine writes as follows: *nothing pertains to the body more than the body’s sex. Yet, twins of different sexes can be conceived when the stars are in the same position*. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 5, ch. 6 (PL 41:146).)* Therefore, celestial bodies have no influence even on material things, and our original position stands.  

Obj. 10: As we read in *On the Causes: the first cause has more effect on what is caused by a second cause than the second cause itself has.* *(*Book of Causes*, prop. 1.)* Now, if bodies here below are disposed by celestial bodies, then with respect to the powers in bodies here below the powers of the celestial bodies are in a relation similar to that of the first cause; and the powers in bodies here below are then like second causes. Hence, effects taking place in bodies here below are determined more by the disposition of the celestial spheres than they are by the powers of the bodies themselves. However, there is necessity in the celestial bodies, since they always remain the same. Therefore, their effects below will also be necessary. But this is not true. Consequently, the first statement—that bodies here below are disposed by heavenly bodies—is also not true.  

Obj. 11: As we read in the *Heavens*, *(Aristotle, *On the Heavens* 1.2, 268b14.)* the motion of the heavens is natural. Consequently, it can hardly be voluntary or the result of a choice The things that are caused by it, therefore, are not caused as the result of a choice, and so do not come under providence. It would be unreasonable, however, to suppose that bodies here below are not governed by providence. Therefore, it is unreasonable for the motion of celestial bodies to be the cause of bodies here below.  

Obj. 12: When a cause is placed, an effect is placed. *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 1, ch. 7; cf. Peter of Spain, *Summulae logicales*, tract. 5, n. 24.)* Therefore, the act of existence of a cause is, as it were, antecedent to that of an effect. Now, if an antecedent is necessary, the consequent is also necessary. *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.6, 75a1.)* Therefore, if a cause is necessary, the effect is likewise necessary. However, the effects taking place in bodies here below are not necessary but contingent. Consequently, they are not caused by the motion of the heavens, which is necessary because natural. Therefore, our original position stands.  

Obj. 13: The final cause of a thing’s becoming is more noble than the thing. But all things were made for the sake of man—even heavenly bodies. For we read the following in Deuteronomy 4:19: *lest perhaps lifting up your eyes to heaven,you see the sun and the moon, and all the stars of heaven, and being deceived by error you adore them, which the Lord your God created for the service of all the nations that are under heaven*. Therefore, man is more noble than the celestial bodies. Now, what is less noble does not influence what is more noble. Consequently, celestial bodies have no influence on a human body, and, for the same reason, none on other bodies such as elements that are prior to the human body.  

Obj. 14: It was said, however, that man is more noble than the heavenly bodies because of his soul, not because of his body.  

*On the contrary*, a nobler perfection is proper to a nobler subject. Now, the body of a man has a more noble form than a heavenly body has; for the form of the heavens is purely material, and a rational soul is much more noble than matter. Therefore, even the body of a man is nobler than a heavenly body.  

Obj. 15: A contrary is not the cause of its contrary. Now, occasionally, the power of a celestial body is opposed to the introduction of certain effects into lower bodies. For example, sometimes a celestial body starts to cause dampness, while a doctor is trying to dispose of some matter by drying it up in order to restore health; and he often succeeds in doing this even though a heavenly body is exerting a contrary influence. Therefore, heavenly bodies do not cause physical effects in bodies here below.  

Obj. 16: Since all action takes place through contact, *(Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 1.6, 322b22; cf. Aquinas, *Disputed Questions on Evil*, q. 16, a. 10, obj. 3.)* what makes no contact does not act. Heavenly bodies, however, do not touch bodies here below. Consequently, they do not act upon them; and the original position stands.  

Obj. 17: But it was said that heavenly bodies contact lower bodies through a medium.  

*On the contrary*, whenever there is contact and action through a medium, the medium must receive the effect of the agent before the end-term does. For example, fire heats the air before it heats us. Now, the effects of the sun and of the stars cannot be received in the lower spheres because these have the nature of the fifth essence *(Aristotle, *On the Heavens* 1.2, 269a2.)* and consequently cannot be affected by heat, cold, or any of the other states found in bodies here below. Therefore, no action can come from the heavenly bodies through the lower spheres to bodies here below.  

Obj. 18: Providence is communicated to what is an instrument of providence. But providence cannot be communicated to heavenly bodies, since they lack intelligence. Therefore, they cannot be an instrument for providing for things.  

On the contrary (1), Augustine says: *bodies with weaker and grosser natures are ruled in a definite order by those that are more subtle and powerful*. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 3, ch. 4 (PL 42:873).)* Now, the heavenly bodies are more subtle and powerful than bodies here below. Therefore, they rule the bodies here below.  

Furthermore (2), Dionysius says that the rays of the sun *enable visible bodies to generate and give them life, nourishment, and growth.* *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 4 (PG 3:700A).)* Now, these are the more noble effects to be found in bodies here below. Consequently, all the other physical effects also are produced by the providence of God through the mediation of celestial bodies.  

Furthermore (3), according to the Philosopher, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 2.2, 993b24.)* that which is first in any genus is the cause of the others that come afterwards in that genus. But the heavenly bodies are first in the genus of bodies, and their motions are first of all material motions. They are, therefore, the cause of material bodies that are moved here below. Hence, the conclusion is the same as before.  

Furthermore (4), according to the Philosopher, *(Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 2.10, 336a31.)* the movement of the sun along an inclined circle causes generation and corruption in bodies here below. Consequently, generations and corruptions are measured by this movement. Aristotle also says that all the variety found in concepts is due to the heavenly bodies. *(Aristotle, *On the Generation of Animals* 4.10, 777b20.)* Therefore, bodies here below are disposed through their mediation.  

Furthermore (5), Rabbi Moses says that the heavens are in the universe as a heart is in an animal. *(Moses Maimonides, *Guide for the Perplexed*, part 1, ch. 71.)* But all the other members are ruled by the soul through the instrumentality of the heart. Therefore, all material things are ruled by God through the instrumentality of the heavens.  

I answer that the common intention of all philosophers was to reduce multitude to unity and variety to uniformity as much as possible. Consequently, after considering the diversity of actions to be found in bodies here below, the ancient philosophers attempted to reduce these bodies to some fewer and more simple principles, that is, to elements, one or many, and to elementary qualities. *(Anaximenes, Diogenes, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Hippasus, and Thales; see Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 1.3, 983b20; *Physics* 1.2, 184b15; *On the Heavens* 3.3, 302a28.)* But their position is not logical; for, in the actions of natural things, elementary qualities are like instrumental principles. An indication of this is the fact that they do not have the same way of acting in all things, nor do their actions always arrive at the same term. They have different effects in gold, in wood, and in the flesh of an animal. Now, this would not happen unless their actions were controlled by something else. Moreover, the action of the principal agent is not reduced to the action of an instrument as to its principle. Rather, the opposite is true, as, for example, a product of handicraft ought not be attributed to the saw but to the craftsman. Therefore, neither can natural effects be reduced to elementary qualities as to their first principles.  

Consequently, others (the Platonists) *(Cf. Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 2.9, 335b9; *Metaphysics* 1.9, 991b3.)* made simple and separated forms the first principles of natural effects. These were the origin, they said, of the existence and generation and every natural property of bodies here below. This opinion also, however, is false; for, if a cause remains always the same, then the effect is always the same. Now, the forms they posited were immovable. Consequently, any generation resulting from them would always have to happen in bodies here below in a constant manner. But we see with our own eyes that what happens is quite the contrary. It is therefore necessary to say that in bodies here below the principles of generation, of corruption, and of the other motions that depend upon these do not always remain the same; but they nevertheless always remain as the first principles of generation, and thereby make continual generation possible. Moreover, they must be unchangeable in their substance, and subject only to local motion. Consequently, as a result of their approach or withdrawal, they bring about diverse and contrary motions in bodies here below. Now, the heavenly bodies are of just such a nature. Consequently, all material effects should be reduced to them as to their cause.  

In this reduction, however, two errors have been made. Some have reduced the bodies here below to heavenly bodies, as though the latter were their absolute first cause, for these philosophers denied that immaterial substances exist. *(The natural philosophers according to Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 4.3, 1005a31–b2; cf. Aquinas, *In II Sent*., d. 15, q. 1, a. 2.)* Consequently, they said that what is prior among bodies is first among beings. This, however, is clearly false. Whatever is moved must be reduced to a first immovable principle, since nothing is moved by itself, *(Aristotle, *Physics* 7.1, 241b24.)* and one cannot keep going back into infinity. Now, even though a heavenly body does not undergo change by generation or corruption or by a motion which would alter what belongs to its substance, it is nevertheless moved locally. *(Cf. Aristotle, *On the Heavens* 1.2, 269a2.)* Consequently, the reduction must be made to some prior principle so that things undergoing qualitative change are traced back by a definite order to that which causes this change in other things but is not so changed itself, although it is moved locally; and then further back to that which does not change in any way at all.  

Others have asserted that the heavenly bodies cause not only the motion of bodies here below but also their very beginning. For example, Avicenna says that, *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 9, ch. 5.)* as a result of what is common to all heavenly bodies, that is, their circular motion, there is caused the common element of bodies here below, namely, first matter; and, as a result of those things which differentiate one heavenly body from another, there is caused the difference in their forms. Thus, the heavenly bodies are media, to some extent, between God and things here below even in the line of creation. This position, however, is contrary to faith, *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 3 (PG 94:873B).)* which teaches that the whole of nature in its first beginning was created directly by God. But that one creature should be moved by another, presupposing that natural powers of each creature are given it as a result of God’s work, is not contrary to faith. Consequently, we say that the heavenly bodies are the causes of bodies here below merely in the line of motion. Thus, these heavenly bodies are instruments in the work of governing, but not in the work of creating.  

Reply Obj. 1: Damascene intends to exclude from heavenly bodies only first causality or any causality which would introduce necessity into bodies here below. For, even if heavenly bodies always act in the same way, their effects are received in lower bodies according to the manner of these lower bodies, which are frequently seen to be in a contrary state. Consequently, the forces exercised by the heavenly bodies are not always able to bring about their effects in the bodies here below, because a contrary disposition prevents them from doing so. This is why the Philosopher says that signs of storms and winds frequently appear, but the storms and winds do not take place because the contrary dispositions are stronger. *(Aristotle, *On Prophesying by Dreams*, ch. 2, 463b23.)*  

Reply Obj. 2: Those dispositions that resist the force of the celestial bodies are caused in their original creation, not by a heavenly body, but by God’s operation, which has made fire to be hot, water to be cold, and so forth. Consequently, we should not reduce all impediments of this kind to the celestial bodies.  

Reply Obj. 3: The active powers in these lower bodies are merely instrumental. Consequently, like an instrument which does not move unless it is moved by a first agent, the active powers of inferior bodies cannot operate unless moved by celestial bodies.  

Reply Obj. 4: That objection touches a certain opinion found in the *Fount of Life* to the effect that no body acts because of any power that it has as a body, because the quantity found in matter prevents the form from acting. *(Avicebron, *The Fountain of Life*, tract. 1, nn. 9–10.)* Hence, every action we attribute to a body is really the action of some spiritual power operating in it. According to Rabbi Moses, *(Moses Maimonides, *Guide for the Perplexed*, part 1, ch. 72.)* this opinion was held by certain teachers among the Moors who said that fire does not heat, but God heats in the fire. This position, however, is foolish, since it denies all things their natural operations. Moreover, it is contrary to what philosophers and saints have said. *(Cf. *SCG* III.69; *ST* I.115.1; *On the Power of God*, q. 3, a. 7.)* Consequently, we say that bodies act by means of their material power; nevertheless, God operates in all things as a first cause operating in a second cause. Therefore, the statement made to the effect that bodies are only acted upon but do not act should be understood in this sense: only that is said to act which has dominion over its action. It was in this sense that Damascene asserted: *brute animals do not act but are only acted upon*. *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 27 (PG 94:960D).)* But this does not mean that animals do not act if act is taken to mean simply the performance of an action.  

Reply Obj. 5: As we read in *Generation and Corruption,* *(Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 1.7, 324a11.)* that which is active is always other than or contrary to that which is passive. Consequently, it does not belong to a body to act upon another body with respect to that which it has in common with that body, but only with respect to that in which it is different from it. A body, therefore, does not act in so far as it is a body, but in so far as it is a certain kind of body. For example, no animal reasons inasmuch as it is simply animal, but some animals reason inasmuch as they are also men. Similarly, fire does not heat in so far as it is a body, but in so far as it is hot. The same is true of a celestial body.  

Reply Obj. 6: Before the advent of natural forms, dimensions are presupposed as existing in matter in a state of incomplete act, not of complete act. Consequently, they are first in the line of matter and of generation. Form, however, is first in the line of completion. Now, a thing acts in so far as it is completed and is an actual being, not in so far as it is in potency. As a being in potency it is merely passive. Hence, it does not follow from the fact that matter or dimensions pre-existing in matter are not active that form is likewise inactive. Instead, the opposite follows. It would follow, however, if these dimensions were not passive, that the form would not be passive. But, as the Commentator says, the form of a heavenly body is not in it through the mediation of dimensions of the sort described. *(Averroes, *De substantia orbis*, ch. 1.)*  

Reply Obj. 7: The order of effects should correspond to the order of causes. According to the author of that book, *(*Book of Causes*, comm. 3.)* however, the following order of causes exists: first, the first cause, God; second, the intelligence; third, the soul. Consequently, the first effect, the act of existence, is properly attributed to the first cause; the second effect, knowing, is attributed to intelligence; the third effect, moving, is attributed to the soul. A second cause, however, always acts in virtue of the first cause, and, consequently, possesses something of its operation, like the lower spheres which possess something of the motion of the highest. According to the author, however, the intelligence not only knows but also gives existence; and the soul, which he holds to be caused by the intelligence, has not only the motion of the soul, which is to move, but also that of an intellect, which is to understand, and that of God, which is to give existence. I admit these to be the actions of a noble soul, but he understands such a soul to be the soul of a heavenly body or any other rational soul whatsoever. Therefore, it is not necessary that the divine power be the only one to move all things without any intermediary. The lower causes can also move through their own powers in so far as they participate in the power of superior causes.  

Reply Obj. 8: According to Augustine, *(Cf. Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 3, ch. 8 (PL 42:875); *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 9, ch. 17 (PL 34:406).)* seminal principles are all the active and passive powers given to creatures by God; and through their instrumentality natural effects are brought into existence. He writes in *On the Trinity: like a mother pregnant with her unborn infant, the world is pregnant with the causes of unborn things.* *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 3, cc. 8–9 (PL 42:877).)* While explaining what he said above about seminal principles, he also called them *the powers and faculties that are allotted to things*. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 3, ch. 8 (PL 42:877).)* Consequently, included in these seminal principles are the active powers of celestial bodies, which are more noble than the active powers of bodies here below and, consequently, able to move them. They are called seminal principles inasmuch as all effects are originally in their active causes in the manner of seeds. But if, as some hold, seminal principles are understood as being the beginnings of forms in first matter, inasmuch as first matter is in potency to all forms, then, even though this does not agree very much with the words of Augustine, it can be said that the simplicity of these principles, like the simplicity of first matter, is caused by their imperfection, and, because of it, they cannot be moved, just as first matter cannot be.  

Reply Obj. 9: Differentiation of the sexes must be attributed to celestial causes. Our reason for saying this is as follows: every agent tends to form to its own likeness, as far as possible, that which is passive in its respect. *(Aristotle, *On Generation and Corruption* 1.7, 324a10; *On the Soul* 2.11, 424a1.)* Accordingly, the active principle in the male seed always tends toward the generation of a male offspring, which is more perfect than the female. From this it follows that conception of female offspring is something of an accident in the order of nature-in so far, at least, as it is not the result of the natural causality of the particular agent. Therefore, if there were no other natural influence at work tending toward the conception of female offspring, such conception would be wholly outside the design of nature, as is the case with what we call “monstrous” births. And so it is said that, although the conception of female offspring is not the natural result of the efficient causality of the particular nature at work—for which reason the female is sometimes spoken of as an *accidental male* *(Aristotle, *On the Generation of Animals* 2.3, 737a28; cf. *ST* I.99.2, obj. 1.)*—nevertheless, the conception of female offspring is the natural result of universal nature; that is, it is due to the influence of a heavenly body, as Avicenna suggests. *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 6, ch. 5.)* Matter, however, can cause an impediment which will prevent both the celestial force and the particular nature from attaining their effect, namely, the production of a male. And so, sometimes, as a result of an improper disposition in matter, a female is conceived even when the celestial influence tends to the contrary; or the opposite may happen, and, despite the influence of the celestial body, a male will sometimes be conceived because the formative influence of the particular agent is strong enough to overcome the defect in the material. In the conception of twins, the matter is separated by the operation of nature; and one part of the matter yields to the active principle more than the other part does because of the latter’s deficiency. Consequently, in one part a female is generated, in the other, a male—independently of the dispositions of the celestial spheres one way or the other. The generation of a female twin, however, happens more often when a celestial body disposes to the female sex.  

Reply Obj. 10: A first cause is said to have more influence than a second cause in so far as its effect is deeper and more permanent in what is caused than the effect of the second cause is. Nevertheless, the effect has more resemblance to the second cause, since the action of the first cause is in some way determined to this particular effect by means of the second cause.  

Reply Obj. 11: Although a movement in the heavens, as it is the act of a movable body, is not a voluntary motion, nevertheless, as it is the act of a mover, it is voluntary; that is to say, it is caused by a will. And in this respect the things which are caused by this movement may come under providence.  

Reply Obj. 12: An effect does not follow from a first cause unless the second cause has already been placed. Consequently, the necessity of a first cause does not introduce necessity into its effect unless the second cause is also necessary.  

Reply Obj. 13: The celestial bodies are not made for man in the sense that man is their principal end. Their principal end is the divine goodness. Moreover, that man is nobler than a heavenly body is not due to the nature of his body but to the nature of his rational soul. Besides, even granting that man’s body were, speaking absolutely, nobler than a celestial body, this would not prevent a celestial body from being nobler than a human body under a certain aspect, namely, as it has active power while the latter has merely passive power; and in this respect, a celestial body can act upon the human body. Similarly, fire as it is actually hot can act upon a human body in so far as the latter is potentially hot.  

Reply Obj. 14: The rational soul is a substance as well as the act of a body. As a substance, therefore, it is nobler than the form of a celestial body; but it is not nobler as the act of a body. Or it could be said that the soul is a perfection of the human body both as a form and as a mover. But, since a celestial body is more perfect, it does not need a spiritual substance to perfect it as a form, but only to perfect it as a mover. This self-sufficiency makes it naturally more noble than [man who needs] a human soul. Even though some have asserted that the movers of the heavenly spheres are joined to them as forms, *(The Platonists, according to Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 8, ch. 16 (PL 41:241); Origen, *On First Principles* [*Peri archon*], bk. 1, ch. 7 (PG 11:173), according to Jerome, *Contra Joannem Hierosolymitanum*, para. 17 (PL 23:385); Jerome, *Commentary on Ecclesiastes,* at Eccl 1:6 (PL 23:1068); *Glossa ordinaria*, at Eccl 1:6, 3.1753; Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 10, ch. 1.)* Augustine left the matter in doubt. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 2, ch. 18 (PL 34:279).)* In his commentary on the words of Ecclesiastes 1:6, *the spirit goes forward surveying all places round about*, Jerome seems to follow the affirmative position; for he says: *he calls the sun a spirit because it breathes and lives like an animal.* *(Jerome, *Commentary on Ecclesiastes*, at Eccl 1:6 (PL 23:1068BC); *Glossa ordinaria*, at Eccl 1:6, 3.1753–54 (PL 113:1117).)* Damascene, however, holds the contrary: *let no one think that the heavens or the stars are living. They lack both life and feeling.* *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 6 (PG 94:885A).)*  

Reply Obj. 15: Even the action of a contrary which resists the active influence of a celestial body has some cause in the heavens; for, as the philosophers say, *(Aristotle, *Physics* 8.1, 250b14.)* things here below are sustained in their actions by the first motion. Consequently, a contrary whose action impedes the effect of a celestial body, like the hot remedy which impedes moistening by the moon, nevertheless has a cause in the heavens. Similarly, the health that follows is not entirely contrary to the action of the celestial body but has some roots there.  

Reply Obj. 16: As is said in *Generation and Corruption,* *(Aristotle, *Generation and Corruption* 1.6, 323a28.)* heavenly bodies contact bodies here below, but are not contacted by them. Moreover, as was mentioned, no heavenly body immediately contacts a body here below. The contact is through a medium.  

Reply Obj. 17: The action of the agent is received in the medium according to the manner of the medium. Consequently, it is sometimes received in a different way in the medium than in the ultimate term. For example, the force of a magnet attracting iron passes to the iron through the medium of air, which is not attracted; and, as the Commentator says, *(Averroes, *Physics*, bk. 8, comm. 35, 37.)* the force of a fish that shocks the hand is transmitted to the hand through a net which is not shocked. Moreover, heavenly bodies do have all the qualities found in bodies below, but in their own way, which is that of a source, and not as in these lower bodies. Consequently, their actions are not received in the intermediate spheres in such a way that these are changed as the lower bodies are.  

Reply Obj. 18: Bodies of this kind here below are ruled by divine providence through the superior bodies, but not in such a way that divine providence is communicated to them. They are made merely the instruments by which God’s providence is carried out—just as art is not communicated to a hammer, which is merely an instrument of the art.
