# Article 6 — Whether predestination is helped by the prayers of the saints

Sixth, it is asked whether predestination is helped by the prayers of the saints? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.23.8; *In I Sent*., d. 41, a. 4; III. d17, a 3, qa. 1, ad 3; IV, d. 45, q. 3, a. 3, ad 5.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for what can be aided can be prevented, but predestination cannot be prevented. Therefore, it cannot be aided in any way.  

Obj. 2: When one thing has its effect whether another thing is present or not, the latter is no help to it. But predestination must have its effect, because it cannot fail whether prayers take place or not. Consequently, predestination is not helped by prayers.  

Obj. 3: Nothing eternal is preceded by something temporal. But prayer is temporal, and predestination is eternal. Therefore, prayer cannot precede predestination, and, consequently, cannot help it.  

Obj. 4: As is clear from the first Epistle to the Corinthians 12:12, the members of the mystical body resemble the members of a natural body. Now, in a natural body, a member does not acquire its perfection by means of another member. Consequently, the same is true [of members] in the mystical body. But the members of the mystical body receive their greatest perfection through the effects of predestination. Therefore, one man is not aided in obtaining the effects of predestination by the prayers of another.  

On the contrary (1), we read in Genesis 25:21: *Isaac besought the Lord for his wife because she was barren; and he heard him, and made Rebecca to conceive.* As a result of this conception Jacob was born, who had been predestined from all eternity; and this predestination would never have been fulfilled had he not been born. But it was effected by the prayer of Isaac. Consequently, predestination is helped by prayers.  

Furthermore (2), in a certain sermon on the conversion of St. Paul, in which the Lord is represented as speaking to Paul, we read: *unless Stephen, my servant, had prayed for you, I would have destroyed you*. *(This sermon has not been found; cf. Augustine, *Sermon 382*, ch. 4 (PL 39:1686); *Sermon 204*, para. 2 (PL 39:2124); *Sermon 215*, para. 4 (PL 39:2146); William Perault, *Sermones de Sanctis XV*.)* The prayers of Stephen, therefore, freed Paul from reprobation; and so through these prayers he was predestined. Hence, we conclude as before.  

Furthermore (3), one can merit the first grace for someone. For the same reason, therefore, he can also merit final grace for him. But whoever possesses final grace is predestined. Therefore, the predestination of one person can be furthered by the prayers of another.  

Furthermore (4), as Damascene tells us in a certain sermon on the dead, Gregory prayed for Trajan and freed him from hell. *(John Damascene, *De his qui in fide dormierunt*, para. 16 (PG 95:261D).)* It seems, therefore, that he was freed from the company of the damned by Gregory’s prayers. Hence, the same must be said as before.  

Furthermore (5), the members of the mystical body resemble the members of a natural body. But in a natural body one member is helped by another. Consequently, the same is true in the mystical body, and the above proposition stands.  

I answer that the claim that predestination can be helped by the prayers of the saints can be understood in two ways. First, it can mean that the prayers of the saints help one to be predestined. This, however, cannot be true of prayers, either as they exist in their own proper condition, which is temporal while predestination is eternal, or as they exist in God’s foreknowledge, because, as explained above, *(Above: a. 2.)* foreknowledge of merits is not the cause of predestination, whether the merits be one’s own or those of another. On the other hand, that predestination is furthered by the prayers of the saints can mean that their prayers help us obtain the effect of predestination as an instrument helps one in finishing his work. The problem has been considered in this way by all those who have studied God’s providence over human affairs. Their answers, however, have been different.  

Attending only to the immutability of God’s decrees, some have declared that prayer, sacrifice, and similar actions help in no way at all. This is said to have been the opinion of the Epicureans, *(Cf. Albert the Great, *Physics*, bk. 2, tract. 2, ch. 19; Cicero, *On the Nature of the Gods*, bk. 1, ch. 18; bk. 2, cc. 16–23; Seneca, *Naturales quaestiones*, bk. 2, ch. 36.)* who taught that all things happened necessarily because of the influence of celestial bodies, which they called gods.  

Others said that sacrifices and prayers help to this extent, that they change the preordination made by those who have the power to determine human acts. This is said to have been the opinion of the Stoics, who taught that all things are ruled by certain spirits whom they called gods; and, even though something had been pre-established by them, according to the Stoics, such a prearrangement could be changed by placating their souls through prayers and sacrifices. Avicenna seems to have fallen into this error, too; *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 10, ch. 1.)* for he asserts that all human actions whose principle is the human will can be reduced to the wills of celestial souls. He thought that the heavenly bodies had souls, and, just as a heavenly body influences a human body, so, according to him, the celestial souls influence human souls. In fact, what takes place in things here below is according to the notions of these celestial souls. Consequently, he thought that sacrifices and prayers helped these souls to conceive what we wished to take place.  

These theories, however, are opposed to the faith. For the first destroys freedom of choice; *(Sirach 15:14; 15:18; cf. *SCG* III.73.)* the second, the certainty of predestination. *(Numbers 23:19; 1 Kings 15:29; Malachi 111:6; cf. *SCG* III.95–96.)* Consequently, we must answer the problem differently, and must say that, while God’s predestination never changes, prayers and other good works are nevertheless effective in obtaining the effect of predestination. Now, when considering any order of causes, we must consider not only the order of the first cause to the effect but also the order of the second cause to the effect and the order of the first cause to the second cause, since the second cause is ordered to an effect only through the direction of the first cause. For, as is clear from *On the Causes,* *(*Book of Causes*, comm. 1.)* the first cause gives to the second cause the power of influencing the effect.  

I say, therefore, that the effect of predestination is man’s salvation, and this comes from it as from its first cause. It can have, however, many other proximate and, as it were, instrumental causes, which are ordered by divine predestination for man’s salvation, as tools are used by a craftsman for completing a product of his craft. Consequently, the effect of God’s predestination is not only that an individual person be saved but also that he be saved by certain prayers or certain merits. Gregory also said this: *what holy men effect by their prayers is predestined to be obtained by prayer.* *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues*, bk. 1, ch. 8 (PL 77:188B).)* Consequently, Boethius says: *if we pray well, our prayers cannot be without effect*. *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 6 (PL 63:862C).)*  

Reply Obj. 1: There is nothing that can check the ordering of predestination. Consequently, predestination cannot be impeded. Many things, however, are related to the ordering of predestination as intermediate causes; and these are said to further predestination in the manner described.  

Reply Obj. 2: From the fact that it is predestined that a certain man will be saved because of certain prayers, these prayers cannot be omitted without detriment to his predestination. The same is true of man’s salvation, which is the effect of predestination.  

Reply Obj. 3: That argument proves that prayer does not help predestination by being, as it were, its cause. This we concede.  

Reply Obj. 4: The effects of predestination, which are grace and glory, are not, as it were, basic perfections but secondary perfections. Now, even though the members of a natural body do not help each other in acquiring their basic perfections, they nevertheless do help each other to acquire their secondary perfections. There is, moreover, a member in the body which, having been formed first, helps in the formation of other members—namely, the heart. *(Cf. Aristotle, *On the Generation of Animals* 2.5, 741b15; 2.6, 742b35.)* Consequently, the argument proceeds on a false assumption.  

Reply Sed Contra 1: We concede this argument.  

Reply Sed Contra 2: Paul was never reprobated according to the disposition made by divine election, because this is unchangeable. He was reprobated, however, according to a [provisional] judgment of God in harmony with lower causes, a judgment which sometimes changes. It follows, therefore, not that prayer was the cause of predestination, but that it furthered only the effect of predestination.  

Reply Sed Contra 3: Although predestination and final grace are interchangeable, it does not necessarily follow that whatever is the cause of final grace in any manner whatsoever is also the cause of predestination. This is clear from what has been said previously.  

Reply Sed Contra 4: Although Trajan was in the place of the damned, he was not damned absolutely; for he was predestined to be saved by the prayers of Gregory.  

Reply Sed Contra 5: We concede the fifth argument.
