# Article 6 — Whether the book of life is spoken of in relation to the natural life of creatures

Sixth, it is asked whether the book of life is spoken of in relation to the natural life of creatures? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.24.2, ad 2; *In III Sent*., d. 31, q. 1, a. 2, qa. 2.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it is, for natural life, as well as the life of glory, is represented in God’s knowledge. Now, God’s knowledge of the life of glory is called the "book of life." Therefore, his knowledge of natural life should be similarly called.  

Obj. 2: God’s knowledge contains all things according to the manner of life, because we read in John 1:3–4: *what was made, in him was life*. Therefore, his knowledge should be called the "book of life" with respect to all things, especially living things.  

Obj. 3: Just as a person is preordained by God’s providence to the life of glory, so is he also preordained to natural life. Now, as mentioned previously, *(Above: aa. 4-5.)* the knowledge of those preordained to the life of glory is called the "book of life." Therefore, the knowledge of those preordained to natural life also is called the "book of life."  

Obj. 4: In its explanation of that verse in the Apocalypse 3:5, *I will not blot out his name out of the book of life,* the Gloss reads: *the book of life is God’s knowledge, in which all things are clear.* *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Rev 3:5, 6.1486 (PL 114:716).)* Consequently, the book of life is said to concern all things, hence, even natural life.  

Obj. 5: The book of life is, as it were, knowledge of the life of glory. But the life of glory cannot be known unless natural life is also known. Therefore, the book of life likewise concerns natural life.  

Obj. 6: The word "life" has been taken from natural life and applied to the life of glory. Now, a thing is said more truly of that of which it is said properly than of that to which it is merely applied. Therefore, the book of life concerns natural life more than it concerns the life of glory.  

Obj. 7: What is more permanent and common is more noble. Now, natural life is more permanent than the life of glory or of grace. Similarly, it is more common, because natural life continues with the life of grace or of glory; but the opposite is not true. Therefore, natural life is more noble than the life of grace and glory. Hence, the book of life concerns the life of nature more than it concerns the life of grace or of glory.  

On the contrary (1), as Augustine says, the book of life is, in a sense, predestination. But predestination does not concern natural life. Hence, neither does the book of life.  

Furthermore (2), the book of life concerns the life which is given by God directly. Natural life, however, is given by God through the medium of natural causes. Therefore, the book of life is not about natural life.  

I answer that the book of life, as mentioned previously, is that knowledge which directs the giver of life in his bestowal of it. Now, when we give anything, we need no direction unless it is necessary to separate those to whom bestowal is to be made from those to whom it is not to be made. Hence, the book of life concerns only that life which is to be granted by choice. Natural life, however, like all other natural goods, is supplied to all in general, according to each one’s capacity. The book of life, therefore, does not concern natural life but only that life which, according to a choice made by God’s will, is given to some and not to others.  

Reply Obj. 1: Although natural life and the life of glory are represented in God’s knowledge, his knowledge of natural life does not fulfill the notion of the book of life as does his knowledge of the life of glory for the reason given.  

Reply Obj. 2: The "book of life" gets its name, not from the fact that it has life, but because it is a book about the life to which some are preordained by God’s election, and because the names of these persons are written down in it.  

Reply Obj. 3: In his providence, God gives life to some as a thing due to their nature, but he grants the life of glory only according to the good pleasure of his will. Consequently, he gives natural life to everything which can receive it, but not the life of glory. Hence, there is no book of natural life as there is a book of the life of glory.  

Reply Obj. 4: The Gloss is not to be understood as meaning that all things are clear—that is, all things are contained—in the book of life. It means, rather, that all which is written in it is clear, that is, all is determined.  

Reply Obj. 5: The book of life implies, as has been said, not only knowledge of the life of glory but also God’s choice—not, however, with respect to merely natural life.  

Reply Obj. 6: The life of glory is less known to us than natural life is. Consequently, we come to know the life of glory after knowing natural life. Similarly, we name the life of glory from natural life, even though more of the nature of life belongs to the life of glory than belongs to natural life. This is true of all the names that we give God which are taken from creatures. Consequently, when the word "life" is used by itself, it need not be understood as necessarily referring to natural life.  

Reply Obj. 7: The life of glory, taken by itself, is more permanent than natural life, because it makes natural life stable. Accidentally, however, natural life is more permanent than the life of grace; that is, it is more closely related to the living thing, to which natural life, but not the life of glory, is due by reason of its essence. Moreover, while natural life is more common in one sense than the life of glory, in another sense it is less common. For a thing is said to be common in two senses. First, it is said to be common through effect or predication; that is, it is found in many things according to one intelligible character. In this sense, that which is more common is not more noble but more imperfect, as animal is, which is more common than man. Now, it is in this sense that natural life is more common than the life of glory. Second, a thing is said to be common after the manner of a cause; that is, it resembles a cause which, while remaining numerically one, extends to many effects. In this sense, what is more common is more noble. For example, the preservation of a city is more noble than the preservation of a family. In this sense, natural life is not more common than the life of glory.
