# Article 5 — Whether the book of life is spoken of in relation to uncreated life

Fifth, it is asked whether the book of life is spoken of in relation to uncreated life? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.24.2; *In III Sent*., d. 31, q. 1, a. 2, qa. 2.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that it is, for as Augustine says, *the book of life is God’s knowledge*. *(It is actually: Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Psalms*, at Ps 68:29 (PL 191:639A).)* But God knows his own life, just as he knows that of others. Consequently, the book of life concerns uncreated life also.  

Obj. 2: The book of life represents life, but not created life; for what is first does not represent what is second, but what is second represents what is first. Consequently, the book of life represents uncreated life.  

Obj. 3: What is predicated of several, but predicated primarily of one and secondarily of the others, is understood simply in its primary predication. Now, life is predicated primarily of God rather than of creatures, because his life, as Dionysius has shown, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 6, para. 1 (PG 3:856A).)* is the origin of all life. Therefore, since life is used simply in the phrase "the book of life," it should be understood as referring to uncreated life.  

Obj. 4: Just as a book implies a representation, so also does a figure, especially when a book represents something by means of figures. But the Son is said to be the figure of the Father (Heb 1:3). Therefore he can be said to be a book with respect to the life of the Father.  

Obj. 5: Book is predicated as being in a relation to that about which the book is written. But the Son is written about in the book of life, for we read in the Psalms: *in the head of the book it is written of me* (Ps 40:7). *(Vulg.: Ps 39:8.)* Now, the life of the Son is not created. Hence, the book of life is concerned with uncreated life.  

Obj. 6: A book and the subject treated there cannot be identical in regard to the same thing. Now, a creature is a book revealing God. Therefore, God cannot be a book revealing created life. Hence, the book of life can be spoken of only in relation to uncreated life.  

Obj. 7: Words, like books, pertain to knowledge. Now, Word is predicated primarily of the divine essence rather than of a creature, because, by uttering himself, the Father utters all creatures. *(Anselm, *Monologion*, ch. 33 (PL 158:188C).)* Consequently, the book of life is primarily concerned with uncreated life rather than with created life.  

On the contrary (1), according to Augustine, *(Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 20, cc. 10, 15 (PL 41:681).)* the book of life is predestination, However, predestination regards only creatures. Therefore, the book of life regards only creatures.  

Furthermore (2), a book represents a thing only by means of figures and likenesses. Now, God knows himself, not by means of likenesses, but by means of his own essence. Therefore, he is not a book with respect to himself.  

I answer that as is clear from what has been said previously, *(Above: aa. 1, 4.)* the book of life is an enrollment which directs the one who confers life in his bestowal of it, in accordance with what has been preordained concerning a certain person. Therefore, the life from which the book of life is named has two aspects. The first is that this life is acquired through someone’s grant; the second is that it follows upon the afore-mentioned enrollment which directs its being granted. Neither of these features is found in uncreated life. God does not acquire his life of glory but has it by his very nature. Moreover, no knowledge precedes his life, but, according to our manner of understanding, his life precedes even his knowledge. Consequently, the book of life cannot be spoken of in relation to uncreated life.  

Reply Obj. 1: Not all of God’s knowledge is called the "book of life," but only that concerning the life which the elect are to possess. This can be gathered from the words that follow the section quoted.  

Reply Obj. 2: To represent a thing means to bear its likeness. There are two kinds of likenesses, however. The first kind, like the likeness in the practical intellect, produces a thing. Through a likeness of this kind, what is first can represent what is second. The second kind of likeness comes from the thing whose likeness it is. Through a likeness of this kind, what comes later represents what comes first, and not conversely. However, the book of life represents life, not by means of the second type of likeness, but by means of the first.  

Reply Obj. 3: What is predicated simply is sometimes understood as applying to that about which it is predicated only secondarily, because some qualification has been added. For example, being [with the added qualification] in another is understood as signifying an accident. Similarly, life, because of the added qualification book, is understood as signifying created life, which is life only secondarily.  

Reply Obj. 4: A figure represents its original as its principle, because a figure and an image are drawn from the archetype as from a principle. The book of life, however, represents life as something that it itself has caused. Now, it belongs to God the Father to be the principle of the Son, who is the figure of the Father, but the life of the Father cannot have anything as its principle. Therefore, there is no parallel between life and a figure.  

Reply Obj. 5: That text of the Psalms is understood of the Son according to his human nature.  

Reply Obj. 6: A cause represents its effect, and the effect its cause. This is clear from what has been said. Accordingly, God can be called a book with respect to creatures, and creatures a book with respect to God.  

Reply Obj. 7: By the force of its own proper signification, Word does not denote the principle of that which is expressed by the word; but the book of life as taken here does. Hence, the two are not similar.
