# Article 3 — Whether the book of life can be appropriated to the Son

Third, it is asked whether the book of life can be appropriated to the Son? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.39.8; *In III Sent*., d. 31, q. 1, a. 2.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for the book of life pertains to life. But life is attributed in Scripture to the Holy Spirit, as, for example, in John 6:64: *it is the spirit that quickens.* Hence, the book of life should be appropriated to the Holy Spirit, not to the Son.  

Obj. 2: In everything, the beginning is the most important. But the Father is called the head or the beginning of the book, as is clear in the Psalms, where we read: *in the head of the book it is written of me* (Ps 40:7). *(Vulg.: Ps 39:8.)* Therefore, the term book should be appropriated to the Father.  

Obj. 3: That in which something is written has the proper nature of a book. Now, a thing is said to be written in the memory; hence, the memory has the nature of a book. But memory is appropriated to the Father, just as intelligence is to the Son, and will is to the Holy Spirit. Consequently, the book of life should be appropriated to the Father.  

Obj. 4: The Father is the head of the book. But, as we read in the Psalms, in the head of the book there is writing about the Son (Ps 40:7). *(Vulg.: Ps 39:8.)* Consequently, the Father is the book of the Son. Therefore, the book [of life] should be appropriated to the Father.  

On the contrary (1), Augustine says that *the book of life is God’s foreknowledge*. *(Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 20, ch. 15 (PL 41:681); cf. Aquinas, *In III Sent*., d. 31, q. 1, a. 2, qa. 1, s.c.; *Glossa interlinearis* and *Glossa ordinaria* at Rev 20:12, 6.1666.)* But knowledge is appropriated to the Son: . . . *Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God* (1 Cor 1:24). Therefore, the book of life is also appropriated to the Son.  

Furthermore (2), book implies a representation, just as mirror, image, stamp, and, figure. But all these terms are attributed to the Son. *(Wisdom 7:26; Col 1:15; Hebrews 1:3.)* Consequently, the book of life should also be appropriated to him.  

I answer that to appropriate means nothing else than to contract something common, making it something proper. Now, what is common to the entire Trinity cannot be appropriated to a single person on the grounds that this belongs more to this person than it does to another. Such an action would deny the equality of the persons. However, appropriation may be made on the grounds that what is common nevertheless has a greater resemblance to what is proper to one person than it has to what is proper to another. For example, goodness resembles what is proper to the Holy Spirit, who proceeds as love, because goodness is the object of love, and so is appropriated to the Holy Spirit. Again, power is appropriated to the Father because power as such is a principle, and being the principle of all divinity is proper to the Father. *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 1, d. 29, ch. 1; Aquinas, *In I Sent*., d. 29, a. 1, s.c. 1; Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 4, ch. 20 (PL 42:908).)* Similarly, wisdom is appropriated to the Son, because it resembles what is proper to the Son, since the Son proceeds from the Father as his Word, and word describes an intellectual procession. Consequently, because the book of life pertains to knowledge, it should be appropriated to the Son.  

Reply Obj. 1: Although life is appropriated to the Holy Spirit, knowledge of life is appropriated to the Son; and it is this that the book of life implies.  

Reply Obj. 2: The Father is called the head of the book, not because the notion of book has more in common with him than with the Son, but because the Son, to whom the name of "book of life" is appropriated, has his origin from the Father.  

Reply Obj. 3: There is no inconsistency in something being appropriated to different persons if this is done under different formalities. For example, the gift of wisdom is appropriated to the Holy Spirit in so far as it is a gift, because love is the reason for all gifts, but it is also appropriated to the Son in so far as it is wisdom. Similarly, memory is appropriated to the Father in so far as it is a principle of understanding; but, in so far as it is a power of knowing, it is appropriated to the Son. Now, it is in the memory as a knowing power that a thing is said to be written in it. Hence, in this sense, memory can have the nature of a book. Consequently, being the book of life is appropriated more to the Son than to the Father.  

Reply Obj. 4: Although being the book of life is appropriated to the Son, this also belongs to the Father, since it is a property of all the persons, not of only one of them. Hence, there is no inconsistency in saying that something is written in the Father.
