# Article 3 — Whether an angel, by means of his own natural powers, attains the vision of God through his essence

Third, it is asked whether an angel by means of his own natural powers can attain the vision of god through his essence? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.12.4; I.56.3; I.64.1, ad 2; I-II.5.5; *In II Sent*., d. 4, q. 1; d. 23, q. 2, a. 1; *SCG* III.52; *In IV Sent*., d. 49, q. 2, a. 6; *Disputed Questions on the Soul*, a. 17, ad 10; *Commentary on 1 Timothy*, ch. 6, lect. 3.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he can, for according to Augustine, *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 2, ch. 8 (PL 34:269).)* in their initial state in which, as many say, *(Cf. Aquinas, *In II Sent*., d. 4, a. 3.)* the angels had only natural powers, they saw in the Word all the creatures that were to be made. Now, this would not have been possible unless they saw the Word. Therefore, by means of its purely natural powers, an angelic intellect saw God in his essence.  

Obj. 2: Whatever can understand what is less intelligible can understand what is more intelligible. *(Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 7.)* Now, the divine essence is most intelligible, because it is most free of matter; and it is because of this condition that a thing becomes actually intelligible. Therefore, since an angelic intellect can by means of its purely natural powers understand other intelligible objects, it can with even greater reason also know the divine essence by means of its purely natural powers.  

Obj. 3: But it was said that, even though the divine essence if taken in itself is most intelligible, it is not most intelligible to an angelic intellect.  

*On the contrary*, the fact that what is more visible in itself is not more visible to us is due to a defect in our sight. There is no defect, however, in an angelic intellect; for, as Dionysius says, an angel is *a pure, clean and spotless mirror.* *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 22 (PG 3:724B).)* Consequently, that which is more intelligible in itself is more intelligible to an angel.  

Obj. 4: According to the Commentator, the principle laid down by Themistius, *this is more intelligible; therefore it is more understood*, *(Averroes, *On the Soul*, bk. 3, comm. 36.)* is applicable to intellects completely separated from matter. Now, an angelic intellect is of this nature. Therefore, the principle can be applied to it.  

Obj. 5: Surpassing visible brilliancy is less visible to our sense of sight because its very brilliancy harms sight. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.2, 426a30.)* But surpassing intelligible brilliancy does not harm our intellect; indeed, it strengthens it. Consequently, that which is more intelligible in itself is more understood by the intellect.  

Obj. 6: To see God in his essence is an act of the intellect. But grace lies in the affective power. Grace, therefore, is not needed in order to see God through his essence. Consequently, angels were able to reach the vision of God merely through natural powers.  

Obj. 7: According to Augustine, *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 13, ch. 1 (PL 42:1014); bk. 9, ch. 3.)* since faith by its essence is present in the soul, it is also seen through its essence by the soul. Now, God by his essence is present to the soul and is present similarly to an angel and to all creatures whatsoever. Consequently, in his purely natural state an angel could see God in his essence.  

Obj. 8: According to Augustine, *(Augustine, *Confessions*, bk. 10, ch. 17 (PL 32:790).)* a thing is present in the soul in three ways: through union, through a notion, and through the presence of its essence. Now, if this division is consistent, it must have been made through opposites. Consequently, since God is present to an angelic intellect through his essence, he is not present to it through a likeness. Hence, God cannot be seen by an angel by means of a likeness. If an angel, therefore, can know God in some way merely by means of his natural powers, it seems that he knows him through his essence naturally.  

Obj. 9: If a thing is seen in a material mirror, the mirror itself must be seen. Now, in the state in which they were created angels saw things in the Word as in a mirror. Consequently, they saw the Word.  

Obj. 10: But it was said that the angels were created not in a purely natural condition but with grace—either with sanctifying grace or with charisms.  

*On the contrary*, just as the light of nature falls short of the light of glory, so also does the light of grace given in sanctifying grace and in charisms. Consequently, if persons possessing either of these graces could see God through his essence, they could, for a like reason, do the same in the state of pure nature.  

Obj. 11: Things are seen only where they are. Now, before things were created, they existed only in the Word. Consequently, when the angels came to know the things that were to be made, they knew them in the Word and thus saw the Word.  

Obj. 12: Nature does not fail in necessary matters. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.9, 432b21.)* But to attain its end is one of the most necessary concerns of nature. Consequently, each and every nature has been provided for in such a way that it can attain its end. Now, to see God through his essence is the end for which a rational creature exists. Therefore, by its own purely natural powers a rational creature can attain this vision.  

Obj. 13: Superior powers are more perfect than inferior. Now, by means of their own natures, inferior powers can attain their objects. For example, senses can attain sensibles; the imagination, objects of imagination. Consequently, since God is the object of the intelligence, as is said in *Spirit and Soul,* *(Pseudo-Augustine, *On the Spirit and the Soul*, cc. 11-12 (PL 40:787); this work is more commonly attributed to Alcher of Clairvaux, among others. Aquinas recognized the inauthenticity of this work in his later writings; for example, in the *Disputed Questions on the Soul* (see especially q. 12, ad 1), Aquinas says the work is not by Augustine but is said to have been written by a Cisterian monk, and in *ST* I.82.5, ad 2, Aquinas says it is not necessary to have faith in the words of this book.)* it seems that an angelic intelligence can see God through its own natural powers.  

Obj. 14: But it was said that such a comparison cannot be made, because the objects of other powers do not exceed the powers themselves, but God exceeds all created intelligences.  

*On the contrary*, no matter how much a created intelligence is perfected by the light of glory, God always infinitely surpasses it. Consequently, if “excess” prevented one from seeing God through his essence, no created intellect would ever be able to attain a state of glory in which it would see God through his essence. This, however, is absurd.  

Obj. 15: In *Spirit and Soul,* we read: *the soul is a likeness of all wisdom,* *(Pseudo-Augustine (Alcher of Clairvaux), *On the Spirit and the Soul*, ch. 6 (PL 40:783); this work is more commonly attributed to Alcher of Clairvaux, among others.)* but so is an angel, for the same reason. Now, things are known naturally by means of their likenesses. Consequently, an angel naturally knows those things which belong to wisdom. But, as Augustine says, wisdom is about divine matters. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 14, ch. 1 (PL 42:1037); bk. 13, ch. 13.)* An angel, therefore, can come to see God through his essence by means of his natural powers.  

Obj. 16: In order that a created intellect see God through his essence, all that is required is that it be made like God. Now, by its very nature, the intellect of an angel is godlike. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:869C).)* Consequently, it can see God through his essence by means of its own natural powers.  

Obj. 17: All knowledge of God is either as through a mirror or through his essence. This is clear from the first Epistle to the Corinthians 13:12: *we see now through a glass in a dark manner, but then face to face*. Now, in their natural condition angels do not know God as through a mirror, because, as Augustine says: *from the time they were created they enjoyed the eternal vision of the Word. They did not know 'the invisible* *(See Romans 1:20.)* *things of God through things that are made.'* *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 2, ch. 8 (PL 34:270).)* (This latter type of knowledge is “seeing through a glass.”) Consequently, angels naturally see God through his essence.  

Obj. 18: We see a thing without a medium if we can think of it without thinking about something else. An angel, however, can by his natural knowledge think of God without thinking about any creature. Consequently, he can see God without any medium; and this is to see him through his essence.  

Obj. 19: Augustine says that those realities which are in the soul in their essence are known by the soul through their essence. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 13, ch. 1 (PL 42:1014); bk. 9, ch. 3.)* But the divine essence is in the soul in this manner. Therefore.  

Obj. 20: That which is not seen through its essence is seen through a species if it is seen at all. Now, the divine essence cannot be seen through a species, for a species is more simple than that of which it is the species. *(Cf. Bonaventure, *In II Sent*., d. 3, part 2, a. 2, q. 2, arg. 4.)* Consequently, since the divine essence is known naturally by an angel, it is known by him through its essence.  

On the contrary (1), to see God through his essence is life eternal. This is clear from the Gospel of St. John 17:3: *this is eternal life.* Now, one cannot attain eternal life through merely natural powers; for, as it is said in the Epistle to the Romans 6:23: *the grace of God is life everlasting*. Consequently, by merely natural powers, one cannot attain the vision of God through his essence.  

Furthermore (2), Augustine says that, even though the soul is made to know God, it can be led to this act of knowledge only by the infusion of divine light. *(Pseudo-Augustine (Alcher of Clairvaux), *On the Spirit and the Soul*, ch. 12 (PL 40:787).)* Consequently, no one can by his natural power see God through his essence.  

Furthermore (3), nature does not transcend its limits. Now, the divine essence surpasses any created nature. Consequently, the divine essence cannot be seen by any natural cognition.  

I answer that in order that God be seen through his essence, the divine essence must be united with the intellect in some way as an intelligible form. However, what is to be perfected can be united with a form only after a disposition is present which makes the subject to be perfected capable of receiving such a form, because a definite act takes place only in a potency suitable for it. *(Cf. Aquinas, *Commentary on Aristotle's On the Soul*, bk. 2, lect. 1.)* For example, a body is united with a soul as with its form only after it has been organized and disposed. Similarly, there must be some disposition produced in the intellect by which it is made perfectible by this form, the divine essence. This disposition is brought about by an intellectual light; and, were this light natural, an intellect could see God in his essence by its purely natural powers. It is impossible, however, for it to be natural, because the ultimate disposition for a form and the form itself must belong to one order. Consequently, if one is natural, so is the other. The divine essence, however, is not the natural intelligible form of a created intellect. This is clear from the principle that act and potency always belong to one genus. Hence, potency in the genus of quantity has no relation to an act in the genus of quality; and, similarly, the natural form of a created intellect can belong only to that genus in which the potency of a created intellect exists. As a result, the form of the intellect cannot be a sensible form, since it belongs to another genus, but can be only an immaterial form belonging to the same genus as the intellect. Now, just as a sensible form lies below the genus of created intellectual powers, so does the divine essence lie above it. Consequently, the divine essence is not a form within the ambit of the natural power of the intellect. Therefore, that intellectual light by which a created intellect receives the ultimate disposition for union with the divine essence as with an intelligible form is not a natural light, but a supernatural light. And this is the light of glory of which the Psalmist speaks when he says: *in your light we shall see light* (Ps 36:9). *(Vulgate: Ps 35:10.)*  

Therefore, the natural capacity of any intellect has a determinate relation to some created intelligible form. This relationship, however, differs in man and in angels, since in man it is to an intelligible form abstracted from sense (all man’s knowledge has its origin in sense); *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 2.20, 100a10; *Metaphysics* 1.1, 981a2.)* however, in angels it is to an intelligible form not received from sense, and especially to that form which is their own essence. Consequently, the knowledge of God that an angel can naturally attain is simply that which he gets when he sees him through his own substance. Hence, we read in *On the Causes: an intelligence understands what lies above it through the mode of its own substance*, *(*Book of Causes*, comm. 8 [7].)* because, inasmuch as it is caused by God, its substance is a certain likeness of the divine essence. The knowledge of God that man can naturally attain, however, is had through knowing him by means of sensible form which, by the light of the active intellect, is abstracted from sensible conditions. Hence, in its commentary on the first chapter of the Epistle to the Romans 1:20, *for the invisible things of him*, the Gloss states that men were given help toward knowing God by sensible creatures and by the natural light of reason. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Romans 1:20, 6.24; Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Romans*, at Rom 1:20 (PL 191:1327); *Sentences*, bk. 1, d. 3, ch. 1.)* However, knowledge of God had by means of a created form is not vision of him through his essence. Consequently, neither man nor angel can attain the vision of God through his essence by their own purely natural powers.  

Reply Obj. 1: This statement of Augustine, that angels saw things in the Word, can be understood as referring to angels, not as they were immediately after their creation, but as they were when they were beatified. Or the reply might be given that, even though they did not see the Word through his essence when they were in a natural state, they saw him in some way by means of a likeness existing within them, and it was from this knowledge that they were able to know creatures. Later, however, they knew them much more fully in the Word when they saw the Word through his essence, since, in so far as a cause is known, its effects are known by means of the cause.  

Reply Obj. 2: Even though the divine essence, taken in itself, is most knowable, it is not most knowable to a created intellect, because it lies outside the order of the latter.  

Reply Obj. 3: The angelic intellect is said to be a pure and spotless mirror without defect because in view of its genus it does not suffer from a defect of intelligible light as the human intellect does. The intelligible light of the human intellect is obscured to such an extent that it must be passive in regard to phantasms under the limitations of space and time and progress discursively from one thing to another. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.6, 430a31.)* This is why Isaac says: *reason is born in the shadow of intelligence:* *(Isaac Israeli ben Solomon, *Liber de definitionibus*.)* and why its intellectual power can grasp the quiddities only of intelligible created forms belonging to its own genus. But the angelic intellect is also found to be “dark” and defective in its relation to the divine essence, which lies outside its genus. Therefore, it falls short of seeing the divine essence, even though the latter in itself is most knowable.  

Reply Obj. 4: This statement of the Commentator is understood as referring to knowledge of created intelligibles, not to knowledge of the uncreated essence. A created intelligible substance is in itself most intelligible, but is less intelligible to us for this reason, that it exceeds forms abstracted by sense, our natural means of knowledge. Similarly—in fact, even to a much greater extent—the divine essence exceeds the created intelligible form by which angelic intellects know. Consequently, an angelic intellect understands the divine essence less [than created things] even though it is more intelligible in itself, just as our intellect knows less about an angelic essence than it does about sensible things, even though an angelic essence is more intelligible in itself.  

Reply Obj. 5: Even though surpassing intelligible brilliancy does not harm the intellect but strengthens it, it sometimes lies beyond the representation of the form by which the intellect understands; and, for this reason, it hinders the intellect. Consequently, the following statement in the *Metaphysics* that the intellect is related to what is most manifest in nature *as the eye of the bat is to the light of the sun* *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 2.1, 993b9.)* is true.  

Reply Obj. 6: For the vision of God through his essence, grace is not required as some kind of immediate disposition; but by grace man merits that the light of glory be given him, and through this he sees God in his essence.  

Reply Obj. 7: Faith is known through its essence in so far as its essence is joined to the intellect as an intelligible form, and not for any other reason. But, the divine essence is not joined to a created intellect in this manner during life. It merely sustains the intellect in its act of existence.  

Reply Obj. 8: That division is made, not through opposing things, but through opposing formal concepts. Consequently, there is no reason why something cannot be in the soul in one manner, say, through its essence, and in another manner also, as through its likeness or image. For an image and likeness of God exist in the soul, even though God is also present there through his essence.  

Reply Obj. 9: The answer here is the same as that given to the first difficulty.  

Reply Obj. 10: Neither sanctifying grace nor charisms suffice for vision of God through his essence. Only perfected grace is sufficient, and this is the light of glory.  

Reply Obj. 11: Even before things existed in their own natures they existed not only in the Word but also in the minds of angels. Consequently, they could be seen even though the Word was not seen through his essence.  

Reply Obj. 12: As the Philosopher says, many degrees of perfection are found in things. *(Aristotle, *On the Heavens* 2.12, 292a22.)* The first and most perfect degree is that wherein a thing has its own goodness without the motion or the help of another, just as the most perfect health exists in one who is healthy by himself without the help of medicine. This is the degree proper to divine perfection. The second degree is that wherein one can attain perfect goodness with slight help or with a little motion, like a man who can keep his health with only a little exercise. The third degree is that wherein one acquires perfect goodness only through many motions, like a man who acquires perfect health only after much exercise. The fourth degree belongs to him who can never acquire perfect goodness, but can acquire only some goodness by means of many motions. The fifth degree belongs to him who cannot acquire any goodness at all and has no movement towards goodness. He is like a man who has an incurable disease and, consequently, does not take any medicine. Now, irrational natures can in no way attain perfect goodness, which is beatitude. They can attain only some imperfect goodness, their natural end, which they achieve through the force of their own natures. Rational creatures, however, can attain perfect goodness, that is, beatitude. Yet, in order to attain this, they need more things than lower natures need in order to obtain their ends. Consequently, even though rational creatures arc more noble, it does not follow that they can attain their end by means of their own natural powers as lower natures do. For, to attain beatitude through one’s own power belongs exclusively to God.  

Reply Obj. 13: A similar reply should be given to this difficulty about the ordering of powers.  

Reply Obj. 14: Even though a created intellect is never elevated by the light of glory to such an extent that the distance between it and the divine essence is no longer infinite, yet, as a result of this light, the intellect is united with the divine essence as with an intelligible form; and this union can happen in no other way.  

Reply Obj. 15: By his natural powers an angel can know God through a likeness; but this knowledge is not the same as seeing God through his essence.  

Reply Obj. 16: The natural conformity which an angelic intellect has with God is not such that it is proportioned to the divine essence as to an intelligible form. It consists rather in this, that an angelic intellect does not receive its knowledge of sensible things from sense as we do; and in other respects, too, the angelic intellect resembles God more than it resembles the human intellect.  

Reply Obj. 17: A thing is seen in three different ways. First, it is seen through its essence, in the way in which a visible essence itself is joined to sight when the eye sees light. Second, it is seen through a species, as takes place when the likeness of a thing is impressed on my sense of sight when I see a stone. Third, it is seen “through a mirror”; and this takes place when the thing’s likeness, through which it is known, is not caused in the sight by the thing itself directly but by that in which the likeness of the thing is represented, just as sensible species are caused in a mirror. Now, to see God in the first manner is natural only to God. It lies above the nature of man and angel. To see God in the second manner is natural to an angel. To see God in the third manner, however, is natural to man himself, for he can come to know God from creature inasmuch as they represent him somehow or other. Consequently, the statement that all knowledge is either through an essence or through a mirror should be taken as referring to human knowledge. The knowledge which an angel naturally has of God lies between these two types.  

Reply Obj. 18: An image of a thing can be considered in two ways. *(Aristotle, *On Memory* 2.1, 450b23.)* First, it can be considered in so far as it is a certain thing; and since as a thing it is distinct from that of which it is an image, under this aspect the motion of the cognitive power to the image will be other than its motion toward that of which it is an image. Second, it can be considered in so far as it is an image. Under this aspect, the motion toward the image will be the same as the motion toward that of which it is an image. Consequently, when a thing is known by means of a resemblance existing in its effect, the cognitive motion can pass over immediately to the cause without thinking about any other thing. This is the way in which the intellect of a person still in this life can think of God without thinking of any creature.  

Reply Obj. 19: Those things which are in the soul in their essence, and are united with it as intelligible forms are understood by the soul through their essences. The divine essence, however, is not present this way in the soul of one still in this life. Consequently, the argument proves nothing.  

Reply Obj. 20: That argument is talking about species abstracted from things, and these must be more simple than the things themselves. A created [angelic] intellect, however, does not know God naturally through such a likeness, but only through a likeness imprinted by him. Consequently, the argument proves nothing.
