# Article 12 — Whether angels know the future

Twelfth, it is asked whether angels know the future? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.57.3; I.86.4; II-II.95.1; *In I Sent.*, d. 38, a. 5; *In II Sent*., d. 3, q. 3, a. 3, ad 4; d. 7, q. 2, a. 2; *SCG* III.154; *Disputed Question on Spiritual Creatures,* a. 5, ad 7; *Quodlibet,* bk. 7, q. 3, a. 1, ad 7; *Compendium theologiae*, ch. 134; *Disputed Questions on Evil*, q. 16, a. 7; *Disputed Questions on the Soul*, q. 20, ad 4.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that they do, for angels know things by means of innate forms. Now, these forms are related equally to the present and future. Consequently, since angels know present things by their means, they also will know the future.  

Obj. 2: Boethius says that God is able to foreknow future contingent events infallibly, because his vision, being measured by eternity, is entirely simultaneous. *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 4, 6 (PL 63:859A).)* But the beatific vision is likewise entirely simultaneous, since it is measured by participated eternity. Consequently, beatified angels know future contingent events.  

Obj. 3: According to Gregory, when the soul severs its connection with the body, it knows the future by means of its own subtle nature. *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues*, bk. 4, ch. 26 (PL 77:357C).)* Now, an angel is completely free of any connection with a body, and its nature is most subtle. Therefore, they can know the future.  

Obj. 4: The potential intellect in our soul is in potency to the knowledge of all things, and hence to the knowledge of the future. Now, as was said above, *(Above: aa. 4, 8–9.)* the potentialities of an angelic intellect are completely actuated by means of innate forms. Angels, therefore, have knowledge about future events.  

Obj. 5: Those who have providence over a person should also have foreknowledge of the things affecting that person. But, as our guardians, the angels have been entrusted with our providence and care. *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 2, d. 11, ch. 1.)* Consequently, they must know things in the future that affect us.  

Obj. 6: The angelic intellect excels the human. Now, a human intellect can know future events which have determined causes in nature. Therefore, an angelic intellect can know even those future contingent events which, not having any determined causes, can happen in either of two ways.  

Obj. 7: We are differently related to knowing the future than we are to knowing the present, because we receive our knowledge from things, and, consequently, things must exist before we can know them. Angels, however, do not receive their knowledge from things. Therefore, they are equally related to knowing the future and the present. Consequently, our original thesis stands.  

Obj. 8: Intellectual knowledge does not include time, because it abstracts from the “here and now,” and so is equally related to all time. Now the only knowledge an angel has is intellectual. Consequently, an angel is equally related to knowing the present, past, and future. Hence, we conclude as before.  

Obj. 9: An angel knows more than a man does. But in the state of innocence man knew future events. This is clear from Genesis 2:24: Adam said: *wherefore a man shall leave father and mother.* Therefore, angels also know the future.  

On the contrary (1), in Isaiah 41:23 we read: *show the things that are to come hereafter: and we shall know that ye are gods*. Thus, knowledge of the future is a sign of divinity. However, angels are not gods. Therefore, they do not know the future.  

Furthermore (2), knowledge with certitude can be had only of those things which have determinate truth. But, as is clear from *On Interpretation*, *(Aristotle, *On Interpretation* 1.9, 18a28–19a39.)* future contingent events do not belong to this class of things. Consequently, they are not known by angels.  

Furthermore (3), future events can be known only through a species of an artistic conception like that by which an artist knows the things he is going to make, or in their causes, as a future cold spell is known in the signs and positions of the stars. But angels do not know the future by means of artistic conceptions, because they do not make anything, *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 3 (PG 94:873B).)* nor do they know future things in their causes, since future contingent events are not determined in their causes. If they were, they would be necessary. There are no means, therefore, by which angels know future contingent events.  

Furthermore (4), Hugh of St. Victor says that *angels were shown what they should do, not what would happen to them in the future*. *(Hugh of St. Victor, *On the Sacraments*, bk. 1, part 5, ch. 18 (PL 176:254A); cf. ch. 21.)* It is even less true, therefore, to say that they know other future events.  

I answer that anything that is known in another thing is known according to the manner in which it exists in that other. Now, some future events are determined in their proximate causes in such a way as to happen necessarily from them, for example, tomorrow’s rising of the sun. Future effects of this sort can be known in their causes. Other future effects, however, do not exist so determinately in their causes that something else might not happen; their causes are merely disposed more to one effect than to another; and these effects are contingent events, which happen more or less often as the case may be. As a consequence, effects of this type cannot be known in their causes with infallibility, but only with conjectural certitude. Moreover, other future effects come from causes that are indifferently related to opposite effects; and these effects, especially those that depend upon free choice, are called “contingent to opposites.” *(Aristotle, *On Interpretation* 1.9, 18b8.)* Now, as the Commentator proves, *(Averroes, *Physics*, bk. 2, comm. 12, 48.)* an effect cannot come from a cause indifferent to opposites and in a certain respect in potency, unless this cause is determined to one cffcct more than to another by means of another cause. Consequently, an effect of this sort cannot be known in any way through causes indifferent to opposites if these causes be taken merely by themselves. Yet, if we consider these causes, which are indifferent to opposites, together with those things that incline them more to one effect than to another, we can get some conjectural certitude about their effects. For example, we can conjecture about future effects depending upon free choice by considering men’s habits and temperaments, which incline them to one course of action.  

But all these future effects, no matter what their proximate causes may be, exist determinately in the first cause, which by its presence sees them all, and by its providence gives a determinate character to each. Now, the angels see the divine essence and, by means of innate forms, know all things and all natural causes. By their natural knowledge, therefore, they can foreknow by their innate forms only those future events which have determinate existence in a natural cause, whether this cause be merely one thing or a collection of many things —for an effect may be contingent with respect to one cause but necessary with respect to a concurrence of many. And since angels know all natural causes, some effects that seem contingent to us, who consider only a few causes, are known as necessary by the angels, who consider all their causes. Indeed, if angels could comprehend God’s providence, they would know all future events with certainty. None of them, however, comprehends his providence perfectly; but because some of them see it more perfectly than others do, they know more future events in the Word, even those coming from causes indifferent to opposites, than others know.  

Reply Obj. 1: Species within an angelic intellect are not related equally to the present and future, because things that are present are actually similar to the forms existing within the angels and, consequently, can be known by their means. Things that are future, however, are not yet similar to these forms and thus, as explained earlier, *(Above: a. 9, ad 3.)* cannot be known through them.  

Reply Obj. 2: Angels are related indifferently to the knowledge of the present and future as far as the vision by which they see things in the Word is concerned. Yet it does not follow that they know all future events in the Word, because they do not comprehend the Word.  

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine tells us, some asserted that *the soul has powers of divination in itself*. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 12, ch. 13 (PL 34:464); bk. 11, ch. 8.)* He refuted this opinion on the grounds that, if the soul could foretell the future by its own means, it would always know future events; but we know that, even if the soul does have foreknowledge at some times, it is unable to know the future whenever it wishes. Consequently, it must need some help in order to know the future. It can be helped by a higher spirit, created or uncreated, good or evil. Moreover, while it is burdened with the weight of a body and fixes its attention on sense-objects, it is less capable of receiving such thoughts. Hence, when it withdraws from the senses, either in sleep or in sickness or by any other way, it thereby becomes more susceptible to the influence of the higher spirit. So, being severed in this manner from its physical connections, the soul foreknows the future with the help of a revelation by a higher spirit, who can reveal these future things, because, as has been said, *(Above: a. 11.)* he knows them either by his natural knowledge or in the Word.  

Reply Obj. 4: There are two kinds of potency. One is natural and can be reduced to act by a natural agent. This potency in angels is completely actuated by innate forms. It is not according to this kind of potency, however, that our potential intellect is in potency to knowing all future things. But there is another potency, obediential potency, according to which the Creator can cause whatever he wants to cause in a creature. The potential intellect is in this kind of potency to the knowledge of all future things, that is, all things can be divinely revealed to it. However, the obediential potency of the angelic intellect is not totally actuated by means of innate forms.  

Reply Obj. 5: It is not necessary for one who has providence over some persons to foreknow future events. It is enough for him to foresee what might happen so he can take proper steps against it.  

Reply Obj. 6: An angelic intellect surpasses a human intellect inasmuch as it knows more contingent effects that exist determined in their causes and these with greater certitude. It does not necessarily surpass it in the respect touched upon in the objection.  

Reply Obj. 7: The reply here should be the same as that given to the first difficulty.  

Reply Obj. 8: By means of his intellectual knowledge, an angel knows things which are here and now, even though he himself is free from space and time. This is clear from what has been said. Hence, it should not occasion surprise if he should know the present in a manner different from that by which he knows the future. For he knows them differently, not because he has a different relation to them, but because, as explained previously, they are differently related to him.  

Reply Obj. 9: In his state of innocence, man did not know future contingent events except in their causes or in the Word, just as angels know them. This is clear from what has been said. *(Above: in the body of the article.)*  

Replies Sed Contra: To the extent that these difficulties are contrary to the truth, an answer will be found in what has been said in this article.
