# Article 16 — Whether morning knowledge be distinguished from evening knowledge in angels

Sixteenth, it is asked whether morning knowledge should be distinguished from evening knowledge in angels? *(Parallel text: *ST* I.58.6–7; q. 62, a. 1, ad. 3; q. 64, a. 1, ad. 3; *In II Sent*., d. 12, a. 3; *On the Power of God*., q. 4, a. 2, resp. ad object.; *Commentary on Ephesians* ch. 3, lect. 3.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for there are shadows in the morning and evening. In an angelic intellect, however, there are no shadows; for, as Dionysius says, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 22 (PG 3:724B).)* angels are very bright mirrors. Therefore, in angels' morning knowledge should not be distinguished from evening knowledge.  

Obj. 2: According to Augustine, *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 4, ch. 22 (PL 34:312).)* that knowledge is called morning knowledge by which an angel knows in the Word the things that are to be created; and that is called evening knowledge by which he knows things in their own natures. Now, angels do not know things differently before they exist than after they exist, since their intellects are like God’s intellect and do not receive their knowledge from things. *(Cf. Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:869C).)* Therefore, their morning knowledge should not be distinguished from their evening knowledge.  

Obj. 3: Evening knowledge is that by which things are known in their own nature. But things are known in their own nature in the Word, because the Word represents things in their individuality even more expressly than the forms within the angels do. Therefore, since morning knowledge is knowledge in the Word, it seems that angel’s evening knowledge should not be distinguished from their morning knowledge.  

Obj. 4: We read in Genesis 1:5: *and there was evening and morning one day*. Now, as Augustine says, day is taken there as meaning angels' knowledge. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 4, ch. 22 (PL 34:312).)* Consequently, angels’ morning and evening knowledge are one and the same.  

Obj. 5: The light of morning grows until noon. However, knowledge of things had in the Word cannot grow into another, fuller knowledge. Therefore, knowledge of things in the Word cannot properly be called morning knowledge. Hence, angels’ morning and evening knowledge cannot be distinguished by the fact that one is knowledge of things in the Word, the other, knowledge of them in their own nature.  

Obj. 6: Knowledge of things that are to be created comes before that of things that are already created. Now, evening knowledge comes before morning knowledge, as is clear from the words of Genesis 1:5: *there was evening and morning one day.* Consequently, it is not proper to distinguish evening knowledge from morning knowledge so that the former means knowledge of things already made, and the latter, of things to be made.  

Obj. 7: Augustine *(Augustine, *City of God*, bk. 11, ch. 29 (PL 41:343); *Against the Manichaeans*, bk. 1, ch. 8.)* compares the knowledge of things in the Word to the knowledge had from an artistic concept, and that of them in their own nature to the knowledge had from the work of art itself. He also compares these two types of knowledge to the knowledge had of a line which is mentally conceived and to that which is had of a line written in dust. But these distinctions do not involve different genera of knowledge. Consequently, knowledge of things in the Word and in their proper nature are not two types of knowledge. Hence, morning and evening knowledge are not distinct.  

Obj. 8: As soon as he was created, an angel knew with morning knowledge. However, he did not know the Word, because he was not created in the state of beatitude, and the sight of the Word is the act of beatitude. Consequently, knowledge of things in the Word is not morning knowledge. Hence, we conclude as before.  

Obj. 9: But it has been said that, even though an angel did not know the Word through its essence, he knew it through some created likeness and, therefore, did, know things in the Word.  

*On the contrary*, all knowledge through, created forms is obscure, because all creatures, taken in themselves, are shadowy. *(The scholastics have attributed this to Origen, which was wrongly stated; cf. Aquinas, *Commentary on John*, at John 1:5; Bonaventure, *De scientia Christi*, q. 4, n. 13; John Scotus Eriugena, *Homily on the Prologue to the Gospel of St. John* (PL 122:290C).)* But evening knowledge is obscure knowledge. Therefore, to know things in the Word, or to know the Word in the manner just described, would not be morning but evening knowledge.  

Obj. 10: Augustine says: *when a mind, strong and vigorous, sees that first truth, it forgets all other things*. *(Augustine, *On Free Will*, bk. 2, ch. 13 (PL 32:1260).)* Therefore, when it sees the Word, it sees nothing else in it. Consequently, the morning knowledge of angels cannot be called the knowledge of things in the Word.  

Obj. 11: Morning knowledge is clearer than evening knowledge. But knowledge of things had in the Word is less clear than that of things in their own nature, because things are in the Word only in a certain respect, but in their own nature without any qualification. It is better, however, to know a thing where it exists simply than to know it where it exists only in a certain respect. Consequently, a distinction cannot be made whereby knowledge of things had in the Word will be called morning knowledge, and that of things in their own nature, evening knowledge.  

Obj. 12: Knowledge had from a thing’s individual immediate causes is more perfect than that had from a general cause. But God is the general cause of all things. Consequently, that knowledge by which things are known in the Word is more imperfect than that by which they are known in their own nature.  

Obj. 13: Things are known in the Word as in a mirror. But things are known more perfectly in themselves than in a mirror. Consequently, they are known more perfectly in their own nature than in the Word. Hence, the same must be said as before.  

On the contrary, Augustine distinguishes these types of knowledge in the manner described. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 4, ch. 22; bk. 5, cc. 18, 23 (PL 34:311; 334).)*  

I answer that the expression “morning and evening knowledge” was introduced by Augustine so that he could hold that the things we read about as having been made in the first six days were really completed without any succession of time. Consequently, he wanted those days to be understood as referring, not to distinct times, but to distinct angelic cognitions. For, just as the presence of physical light on things here below makes a day in the temporal sense, so does the presence or operation of light from an angelic intellect on created things make a day in the spiritual sense. Consequently, as many days can be distinguished as there are relations from angelic intellects to the different classes of things to be known. Taken in this way, the order of a day would not be an order of time but an order of nature, and this would be found in angelic knowledge according to the order that the known things have to each other, that is, according as one thing is prior by nature to another. Moreover, just as morning is the beginning of a temporal day and evening its end, so the beginning and end of an angel’s knowledge of some one thing would be determined by the order in that thing. Now, the beginning of anything is to be found in the cause from which it issues; its end, in the thing itself, because it is in this that the action of the productive cause terminates. Hence, the first knowledge to be had of a thing is that in which it is considered in its cause, the eternal Word. For this reason, the knowledge of things in the Word is called morning knowledge. The last knowledge to be had of a thing is that in which it is known in itself. This is called evening knowledge.  

It should be understood, however, that that distinction can have two meanings. First, it can refer to a distinction in the thing known; second, it can refer to a distinction in the medium of knowledge. Taking the distinction in the first way, we can say that a thing is said to be known in the Word when the being it has in the Word is known; and it is said to be known in its own nature in so far as the being which it has in itself is known. But this way of understanding causes difficulties, because the being which it has in the Word is not other than that of the Word itself, since, as Anselm says, *the creature in the Creator is simply the creative essence*. *(Cf. Anselm, *Monologion*, cc. 35–36 (PL 158:190D); Alexander of Hales, *Glossa in libros sententiarum,* bk. 1, d. 8, n. 29, p. 108; Bonaventure, *In I Sent*., d. 36, a. 2, q. 1, f. 3.)* Hence, to know a creature in the Word in this manner is to know, not the creature, but rather the Creator. Consequently, this distinction between morning and evening knowledge must be referred to the medium of knowledge. Accordingly, a thing will be said to be known in the Word when it is known in its own nature through the Word; and it will be said to be known in its own nature when it is known by means of some created forms proportioned to created things, as things are known [to angels] by innate forms or by acquired forms—if, indeed, angels did know by acquired forms, but it would make no difference as far as the present problem is concerned.  

Reply Obj. 1: The figure of evening and morning in angelic knowledge is not based on the fact that there are shadows in the morning and evening of a temporal day, but, as has been said, on the fact that these two have the nature of a beginning and end. Or it can be said that all intellects, being created from nothing, are shadowy in comparison with the brightness of God’s intellect. They do, however, have some brightnes in so far as they imitate his intellect.  

Reply Obj. 2: In the Word the angels know in the same way the things that are to be created and the things already created. But the way in which they know in the Word the things to be created differs from the way in which they know the individual natures of things already created when they know these latter by means of a similitude within them selves. It is according to this difference that their morning and evening knowledge are distinguished.  

Reply Obj. 3: Even though things are more expressly represented in the Word than they are by the forms within an angel’s intellect, nevertheless, these forms are more proportioned to things and, in a way, conformed to them. Hence, this kind of knowledge, and not knowledge in the Word, is said to be of things in their own nature.  

Reply Obj. 4: Just as one general science contains within itself different particular sciences by which different conclusions can be known, so also all the knowledge an angel has, being in some sense a whole, contains within itself morning and evening knowledge as, in a way, its parts—as a temporal day has morning and evening for its parts.  

Reply Obj. 5: It is not necessary that spiritual things be like material things in all respects. Hence, knowledge of things in the Word is not called morning knowledge because it grows into greater knowledge, but, as has been said, because of its relation to an inferior knowledge.  

Reply Obj. 6: Morning knowledge comes before evening knowledge if we consider the natural ordering found in one and the same thing. But, if we consider different things, evening knowledge of what is prior precedes morning knowledge of what is posterior, that is, as long as knowledge is considered from the viewpoint of what is prior and posterior in the things known. Consequently, in Genesis, evening is put before morning, because the work of the first day was light, which Augustine understands as a spiritual light enkindled by knowledge of the Word. *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 1, ch. 3 (PL 34:248); bk. 4, cc. 22, 24 (PL 34:311; 313).)* By their natural knowledge, however, angels first knew themselves in themselves, and, having known themselves, they did not remain there to enjoy their own selves and, as it were, make themselves their own ends (for then they would have become “night”—as angels who sinned); instead, they turned their knowledge back to the praise of God. Hence, from contemplation of themselves angels turned to a contemplation of the Word, in whom existed the morning of the following day, inasmuch as the angels received knowledge in the Word of the creature that was to follow, namely, the firmament. Therefore, just as we see that in continuous time the same now belongs to two times, that is, it is the end of the past and the beginning of the future, so morning knowledge of the second day is the end of the first day and the beginning of the second, and so on until the seventh day is reached.  

Reply Obj. 7: The knowledge had of a work of art from its artistic concept is not the same as that had from the thing already made. The first knowledge is universal only; the second can also be particular, as, for example, when I look at a particular house that has been made. Besides, there is no parallel at all, because created art is more proportioned and conformed to artificial things than uncreated art is to created things.  

Reply Obj. 8: At the moment of his creation, an angel was not beatified and did not see the Word through his essence. Hence, he did not have morning knowledge, but first he had evening knowledge and from this progressed to morning. For this reason, the first day is expressly said not to have had a morning, but began as evening, and from evening passed into morning. The reason for this was that that spiritual light, namely, the angelic substance, made on the first day, knew himself as soon as he was made. This was his evening knowledge. Then he turned this knowledge to the praise of the Word, and in the Word his knowledge became morning knowledge. This is why Genesis 1:5 says: *and there was evening and morning one day*.  

Reply Obj. 9: Evening and morning knowledge must be distinguished with respect to the medium of knowledge, not with respect to the thing that is known. Knowledge of the Creator through creatures, therefore, is evening knowledge, just as, conversely, knowledge of creatures through the Creator is morning knowledge. To this extent, the argument is correct.  

Reply Obj. 10: A strong mind intent on divine things is said to forget other things, not in the sense that it does not know them, but in the sense that it no longer esteems them. For, when we see God’s majesty, we consider as of little value creatures that previously seemed to be of very great worth.  

Reply Obj. 11: Knowledge of things in the Word is more perfect than that of them in their own nature, because the Word expresses each one of them more clearly than a created species does. Moreover, the statement that things exist more truly in themselves than they do in the Word can be understood in two ways. First, it can mean that the existence they have in themselves is more perfect than that which they have in the Word. But this is false, because in themselves they have a created act of existence, and in the Word, uncreated being. Consequently, the existence they have in themselves is existence only in a certain sense as compared with that which they have in the Word. Second, it can mean that the thing can be its individual self more perfectly in its own being than in the Word. This, to a certain extent, is true. For in itself a thing is material (at least materiality belongs to the nature of some things); in the Word, however, it is not material. There is merely a likeness of the thing’s matter and form in the Word. Although it is true that a thing in so far as it is such and such exists only in a certain fashion in the Word, nevertheless, it is known more perfectly through the Word than through itself, even in so far as it is such and.such a thing. The reason for this is that a thing’s own nature is more perfectly represented in the Word than it is in itself, and this despite the fact that it exists more truly in itself when it exists according to its own mode of existence. For knowledge follows the representation of the form. Hence, even though a thing is not in the soul except in a qualified sense, that is, by its likeness, it is known simply as a thing.  

Reply Obj. 12: God himself is the proper and immediate cause of each and every thing, and, as Augustine says, in some way he is more closely united to each thing than the thing is to itself. *(Augustine, *Confessions*, bk. 3, ch. 6 (PL 32:688); *Enarrationes in Psalmos*, at Psalm 74:6–8, para. 9 (PL 36:952–53).)*  

Reply Obj. 13: Forms do not flow into things from a mirror; rather, they flow into a mirror from things. From the Word, however, forms flow into things. Consequently, no parallel can be drawn between knowledge of things had from a mirror and that of them had in the Word.
