# Article 10 — Whether higher angels know more through universal forms than those by which lower angels know

Tenth, it is asked whether higher angels know by forms more universal than those by which lower angels know? *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.55.3; q. 89, a. 1; *In II Sent*., d. 3, q. 3, a. 2; *Commentary on the Book of Causes*, lect. 10; *Disputed Questions on the Soul*, a. 7, ad 5; a. 18.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for the higher angels’ knowledge is more perfect than the lower angels. Now, what is known by universal knowledge is less perfectly known than what is known by particular knowledge. Consequently, the higher angels do not know by means of forms that are more universal.  

Obj. 2: If the knowledge of the higher angels is more universal than that of the lower angels, this universality pertains either to their causal operations or to the object of their knowledge. It does not, however, pertain to their operations, for, as Damascene says, the higher angels do not make things; *(John Damascene, *On the Orthodox Faith*, bk. 2, ch. 3 (PG 94:873B).)* nor does it pertain to the object of their knowledge, for both higher and lower angels know the things of nature. Consequently, the higher angels’ knowledge is not more universal.  

Obj. 3: If the higher angels know all that the lower do but through more universal forms, these forms in the higher angels’ intellects must extend to more things. However, one and the same thing cannot represent the individual characteristics of many things. Therefore, the higher angels would not know things in their individual natures, and so their knowledge would be less perfect than that had by lower angels. This, however, is absurd.  

Obj. 4: As Dionysius says, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:869C).)* the knowledge of angels is determined by the power and nature of the knower. Now, the nature of a higher angel is more in act than a lower angel’s nature is. Consequently, his knowledge is also more in act. But universal knowledge is in potency, and particular knowledge is in act. Therefore, higher angels know through forms that are less universal.  

On the contrary (1), according to Dionysius, higher angels, such as the Cherubim, have higher and more universal knowledge. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 12, para. 2 (PG 3:292C).)* Lower angels have only particular and inferior knowledge.  

Furthermore (2), in *The Book of Causes* it is said that *the higher intelligences contain forms that are more universal.* *(*Book of Causes*, prop. 10 [9].)*  

Furthermore (3), higher angels possess greater simplicity than the lower do. Consequently, their forms are also more simple and, therefore, more universal, for what is more universal possesses greater simplicity.  

I answer that that which is in potency to many is made determinate to one by act. Consequently, form and act are found to be principles of union, but potency is found to be the principle of multiplicity and division. Now, since the ability of a thing to operate comes from its being in act, the more united a power is, *(*Book of Causes*, prop. 17 [16].)* the more it is able to act. Consequently, the higher a power is, the fewer the things it needs for its operation, even though it extends to many things. We see that this is generally true of productive and knowing powers. For, even though a master art, such as architecture, by one form directs all the operations coming within its scope, in these operations the subordinate workmen are directed by diverse arts. The same is true of the cognoscitive powers. A person with a higher intelligence is ready, from a few principles he has within himself, to proceed to various conclusions which those with a less acute intelligence cannot reach without considerable illustrated explanation and without knowing the proximate principles of these conclusions.  

Now, since in God there is pure act and a most perfect power, he can do all things, and know all things most perfectly by means of one thing, his own essence. Moreover, as was previously explained, *(Above: a. 9.)* the representations of intelligible things flow from God into the angels, not in order that the angels may cause things, but in order that they may know them. Consequently, the more act and less potency there is in an angel, the fewer are the emanations he receives, and the stronger is his power to know. According to this principle, therefore, the higher angels know through forms more universal than those by which the lower know.  

Reply Obj. 1: To know something “by universal knowledge” can be understood in two ways. First, it can refer to what is known. If taken this way, then to know something by universal knowledge means to know the universal nature of an object. In this sense, the argument is true, because, if only the universal nature of a thing is known, the thing is known less perfectly than it would be were it known in its individuality. Secondly, the phrase can refer to the medium of cognition. Then to know a thing by universal knowledge, that is, by a medium which is universal, is more perfect, as long as this knowledge extends to the individuality of the thing.  

Reply Obj. 2: These forms are said to be more universal with respect to knowledge, not because they cause the knowledge of more things, but because a higher intellect, perfected by a few of them, can nevertheless know the same number of things—even more perfectly. For example, a higher angel might know all species of animals by means of one form of animal, but a lower angel would not know them except through many forms. Besides this, a higher angel can draw out many more intelligible characters from the same things.  

Reply Obj. 3: What is one cannot be the intelligible representation of many in their individuality if it is merely equal to them. However, if it excels them, then it can represent their individual characteristics, because, within its own one form, it contains the individual characteristics of each of the elements which these objects have separately. In a similar manner, God’s essence is the intelligible representation of all things in their individuality, for, as Dionysius says, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 5, para. 8 (PG 3:824C); *The Mystical Theology*, ch. 1.)* in this one form there preexists all that is found separately in creatures. Similarly, since the forms in the intellects of angels, being closer to God, excel things, it is not inconsistent to say that one form within an angelic intellect is an intelligible representation of many things in their individuality, according as this form has different relationships to different things, just as the divine essence is the proper representation of many things in their individuality according to its different relationships to things; and from these relationships an angel can have many ideas. The forms in our intellects, however, are received from things. Hence, they do not excel things, and are, as it were, equal to them as far as representation goes, even though they may excel them in mode of being because their act of existence is immaterial. Consequently, one form in our intellect cannot be the intelligible representation of many things in their individuality.  

Reply Obj. 4: The answer is the same as for the first difficulty.
