# Article 8 — Whether an angel knows material things through forms or by knowing his own essence

Eighth, it is asked whether an angel knows material things through forms or by knowing his own essence? *(Parallel texts: below: q. 10, a. 4; *ST* I.55.1; *SCG* II.99; *In II Sent*., d. 3, q. 3, a. 1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he knows them by knowing his own essence, for a thing can be known sufficiently by knowing what it is modeled upon. Now, in the opinion of Clement, a philosopher mentioned in *On the Divine Names,* *(Psuedo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 5, para. 2 (PG 3:868B).)* lower beings are modeled upon higher. Consequently, the essences of material things are modeled upon angels. Angels, therefore, know material things by means of their own essences.  

Obj. 2: Material things are known better in the divine essence than they are in their own natures, because there they shine forth more brightly. Now, the essence of an angel is closer to the divine essence than material things are. Consequently, material things can be known better in the essences of angels than in their own nature; and since we human beings know material things in their own nature, still truer is it that angels know them all simply by looking at their own essences.  

Obj. 3: The light of the angelic intellect is more perfect than the light of the active intellect of our soul. Now, we know all material things in the light of this intellect because it is the act of all intelligibles. Consequently, it is even truer to say that, by knowing their own light, angels know all material things.  

Obj. 4: Since an angel knows material things, he must know them either by their species or by knowing his own essence. However, he does not know them through species—not through particular species, because an angel is completely free from matter; and not through universal species, because then he would not have perfect knowledge of things in their individuality. Consequently, he knows material things by means of his own essence.  

Obj. 5: If physical light could know itself, it would know all colors, because it is the act of all colors. Therefore, since an angel is a spiritual light, by knowing himself he can know all material things.  

Obj. 6: An angel’s intellect lies halfway between the divine and the human intellect. Now, the divine intellect knows all things by means of the divine essence, and a human intellect knows all by means of species. Consequently, the intellect of an angel will know at least some things by knowing his essence.  

Obj. 7: Dionysius says: *Scripture asserts that angels have knowledge of things that are on earth, by seeing them, not through sense, but through the power and nature of their godlike minds*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:869C).)* Hence, it seems that they know material things by knowing their own power and nature.  

Obj. 8: If a physical mirror could know and if the species of material things were not reflected in it, it would know them by means of its own essence. But species of material things are not reflected in the intellect of angels, as is evident from the writings of Dionysius. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:868B).)* And since an angel, as Dionysius also says, is a kind of mirror, if he knows material things, he must know them by means of his own essence. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 22 (PG 3:724B).)*  

Obj. 9: The knowing power of angels is more perfect than the natural power of material things. Now, many of the powers of material things can attain their objects by their own means, without anything being added to them. It is much more true, therefore, to say that the intellect of an angel knows material things by means of his essence and without any species.  

Obj. 10: An angel’s ability to know is much greater than fire’s ability to burn. But fire can burn combustible material without that material entering into the fire. So, likewise, an angel knows through itself without the presence of a cognoscible species within it.  

On the contrary (1), it is stated in *The Book of Causes* that *every intelligence is filled with forms.* *(*Book of Causes*, prop. 10 [9].)* Moreover, it is said in the same work that *forms exist in an intelligence in an intelligible manner*. *(*Book of Causes*, comm. 13 [12].)* Consequently, an intelligence knows things by means of these forms and not by means of its essence.  

Furthermore (2), the essence of an angel has more in common with another angel than with a material thing. But an angel cannot know other angels by knowing his own essence. Therefore, he cannot know material things by knowing his own essence.  

Furthermore (3), that which is the principle of unity cannot be the principle of distinction. Now, the essence of an angel is the principle of his unity, for it is by means of his essence that an angel is one. Therefore, his essence cannot be the principle of knowledge about things distinct from him.  

Furthermore (4), nothing except God is that which it has. But an angel has intellectual power. Therefore, he is not intellectual power. Much less is he that by which he understands. Consequently, he does not understand things by means of his essence.  

I answer that all knowing takes place by means of assimilation, and likeness existing between two things is caused by their agreement in a form. Now, since unity in an effect shows unity in a cause, and, since, in consequence, no matter what genus any form may belong to, one must get back to the one first principle of that form, two things can resemble each other for two reasons only: either one is the cause of the other or both have been caused by one cause that has imprinted the same form upon both. Using this principle, we say that angels know material things in a manner different from that in which philosophers say that angels know them.  

For we do not say that angels cause material things. God is the Creator of all things, visible and invisible. *(Cf. above: q. 5, a. 8.)* Consequently, a likeness of the things of nature cannot be within an angel unless it comes from him who is the cause of material things. Now, whatever one does not have from himself but from another is over and above his own essence. For this reason, Avicenna proves that the act of being of anything except the First Being is something other than its essence, because all things have their act of existence from another. *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 8, ch. 4.)* Consequently, the likenesses of material things existing within an angel must be other than his essence and must be imprinted there by God. Now, the intelligible representations of material things existing in the divine mind are life and light: *(Cf. above: q. 4, a. 8.)* they are life inasmuch as they come forth to constitute things in their act of existence, as the form of an artistic conception comes forth to constitute a product of art; they are light inasmuch as they cause impressions, resembling themselves, on the minds of angels.  

Philosophers, however, have asserted that angels are the creators of material things. *(Plato, from Macrobius, *Commentary on the Dream of Scipio*, bk. 1, ch. 14; *Book of Causes*, comm. 3; Algazel, *Metaphysics*, part 1, tract. 5; Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 9, ch. 4.)* But logically, according to this position, angels should know material things, not by means of their own essences, but by means of forms added to them. For the likeness of an effect is in its cause only in the manner in which the power to produce that effect is there. Now, as is said in *On the Causes, an intelligence gives existence to inferior things only by means of God’s power existing within it*; *(*Book of Causes*, comm. 9 [8].)* and for that reason the author calls this operation divine. Consequently, this power does not belong to the intelligence as flowing from the principles of its essence, but is something over and above its essence. Therefore, even if material things were caused by an angel, their likenesses would be over and above his essence.  

It is clear, therefore, no matter what position is taken, that an angel does not know material things by means of his own essence but only by means of their forms existing within him.  

Reply Obj. 1: According to its formal nature, an archetype implies a relation of causality to the things modeled upon it; for an archetype is a thing that something else is made to imitate. Consequently, in the passage cited, Dionysius finds fault with Clement’s opinion, and holds that the archetypes of things should be called intelligible representations of things, existing in God. However, if an archetype is taken in a broader sense as meaning a thing that is represented in some way by another thing, then angels’ essences can also be called the archetypes of material things. But the divine essence is the archetype of each and every thing in its individuality, because it contains the exemplary ideas of all things. Similarly, an angelic essence is a likeness of a material thing in its individuality because of the form which the angel possesses of it; though this form is not the same as his essence, as is true of the idea in God.  

Reply Obj. 2: The divine essence is infinite. Hence, far from being included in any genus, it contains, as Dionysius, Aristotle, and Averroes say, the perfections of all genera. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 13, para. 1 (PG 3:977B); Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 5.16, 1021b30; Averroes, *Metaphysics*, bk. 5, comm. 21.)* Consequently, it can be a likeness of all things in their individuality, and through it all things can be known perfectly. The essence of an angel, however, is confined within a particular genus. Consequently, it cannot be, in itself, a likeness of all material things. Hence, to know a thing with all its individual characteristics, an angel must be given a likeness of it, which is over and above his essence.  

Reply Obj. 3: All things are not known by means of the agent intellect as though by a likeness sufficient for us to know all things. For the agent intellect is not the act of all intelligible forms in the sense that it is this or that form, but only in so far as these forms are intelligible. For all things are said to be known by means of the agent intellect as through an active principle of knowing.  

Reply Obj. 4: An angel knows things neither through particular species nor through universal species that are universal forms abstracted from the senses. Instead, he knows them through universal species which represent both universals and particulars. This will become clearer from our discussion later on. *(Below: aa. 9, 11.)*  

Reply Obj. 5: Were physical light to know itself, it would not for that reason know all colors determinately. It would know them only in so far as they are visible. Otherwise, even the eye would see all colors by seeing light; and this is clearly false.  

Reply Obj. 6: Since the angelic intellect lies halfway between the divine and the human intellect, it knows things other than itself by means of forms added to its essence; and, in this respect, it falls short of the divine intellect. However, it knows itself by means of its own essence, and, in this respect, it surpasses the human intellect.  

Reply Obj. 7: This statement of Dionysius should not be understood as meaning that an angel’s power and nature are the medium by which he knows other things, but that his manner of knowing follows the characteristics of his nature and power and not the characteristics of the natures of the things he knows. This is clear from the fact that he knows material things in an immaterial manner, and sense-objects without the aid of any senses.  

Reply Obj. 8: Even if a physical mirror knew itself, it would by no means know other things simply by knowing its own essence. It would know things only by knowing forms reflected in itself. Moreover, it would make no difference whether these forms were received from things or were innate in the mirror.  

Reply Obj. 9: The knowing power of an angel is ordered to a more sublime act than is the natural power of a material thing. Consequently, event though it may need more help, it remains a more perfect and more noble power.  

Reply Obj. 10: A knower is not related to the known as what burns is related to the combustible. In this second case, one is active and the other passive; but a knower and the known are related as one principle of knowing inasmuch as the act of knowing in some way comes into being from the known and the knower. This is clear from what was said previously. *(Above: a. 6.)* Hence, the argument proves nothing.
