# Article 4 — Whether an angel, seeing God through his essence, knows all things

Fourth, it is asked whether an angel, seeing God through his essence, knows all things? *(Parallel texts: below: q. 20, aa. 4–5; *ST* I.12.8; I.57.4–5; I.106.1, ad 1; III.10.2; *In II Sent*., d. 11, a. 2; *In III Sent*., d. 14. a. 2, qa. 2; *In IV Sent*., d. 45, q. 3, a. 1; d. 49, q. 2, a. 5; *SCG* III.56, 59.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he does, for as Isidore says: *angels see all things in the Word of God before they come into being.* *(Isidore of Seville, *Sentences* (*De summo bono*), bk. 1, ch. 10, para. 17 (PL 83:556C); bk 1, ch. 12; cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 2, d. 11, ch. 2.)*  

Obj. 2: Every faculty of sight sees those things whose likenesses it has within it. But the divine essence, a likeness of all things, is joined to the angelic intellect as an intelligible form. Consequently, when an angel sees God through his essence he sees all things.  

Obj. 3: If an angel does not know all things, this is because of a defect in his faculty of knowing or in its objects or in the medium of his cognition. But his lack of knowledge is not due to any defect in the angel’s intellect, for, as Dionysius says, an angel *is a pure and spotless mirror.* *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 22 (PG 3:724B).)* Nor is it due to any defect in the objects of this faculty, for all things are knowable in the divine essence. Finally, it is not due to any defect in the medium by which angels know, for the divine essence represents all things perfectly. Consequently, seeing God, an angel sees all things.  

Obj. 4: An angel’s intellect is more perfect than the intellect possessed by a human soul. But the human soul has the power to know all things; for as is said in *On the Soul*, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.8, 431b21.)* it is *all things in some manner* since it is natural for it to know all things. Consequently, an angelic intellect can also know all things. Now, nothing is more effective in bringing an angelic intellect to the act of cognition than the divine essence. Therefore, when an angel sees the divine essence he knows all things.  

Obj. 5: As Gregory says, love in heaven is equated with knowledge, for there one’s love is proportioned to his knowledge. *(Gregory the Great, *Homilies on Ezekiel*, bk. 2, homily 9, para. 10 (PL 76:1048C); *Morals on the Book of Job*, bk. 26, ch. 12.)* But one who loves God will love in him all things lovable. Consequently, one who sees God will see all things knowable.  

Obj. 6: If an angel, seeing God, does not see all things, then this is only because all the intelligibles are infinite. But an angel is not kept from understanding by the fact that the object of his intellect is infinite, for the divine essence itself is distant from him as something infinite from what is finite. Consequently, it seems that when an angel sees God he can see all things.  

Obj. 7: The knowledge one has in heaven is greater than that had by one on earth, no matter how much the knowledge of the latter is elevated. Now, all things can be revealed to one still on earth. That all things present can be revealed is clear from the case of Benedict, who, as Gregory says, *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues*, bk. 2, ch. 35 (PL 66:198B).)* was shown the whole world at once. That all future things can be revealed is also clear, since God reveals some future events to prophets; and, in the same way, he could reveal all of them to a prophet—and all past things, too. For an even better reason, therefore, an angel seeing God in the heavenly vision knows all things.  

Obj. 8: Gregory writes as follows: *what is there that they do not see when they see the one that sees all things*? *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues*, bk. 4, ch. 33 (PL 77:376B).)* Now, angels see God, who knows all things, through his essence. Consequently, angels know all things.  

Obj. 9: As regards knowledge, the power of an angel is not less than that of a soul. But Gregory says: *every creature is small for a soul who sees the Creator.* *(Gregory the Great, *Dialogues*, bk. 4, ch. 35 (PL 66:200A).)* Therefore, every creature is small to an angel; thus our conclusion is the same as before.  

Obj. 10: Spiritual light pours itself into the mind with greater force than physical light does into the eye. But, if physical light were the adequate cause of all colors, then in pouring itself into the eye it would manifest all colors. Consequently, since God himself, who is spiritual light and the perfect principle of all things, pours himself into the mind of an angel who sees him, by knowing God the angel will know all things.  

Obj. 11: Cognition is, as it were, a kind of contact between the knower and the knowable. Now, if a simple thing is touched, whatever there is in it is touched. *(Cf. Bonaventure, *In III Sent*., d. 14, a. 1, q. 2, arg. 4.)* But God is simple. Therefore, if he is known, all things are known, because all their intelligible characters exist within him.  

Obj. 12: Knowledge of creatures does not belong to the substance of beatitude. Therefore, creatures seem to be related equally to the knowledge had in that state: one who is beatified knows either all creatures or none at all. But, since he knows some creatures, he must know them all.  

Obj. 13: Any potency that is not reduced to act is imperfect. But the intellect of an angel is in potency to the knowledge of all things; otherwise, it would be inferior to the human intellect, which has the power "to become all things." *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.5, 430a14.)* Consequently, if an angel did not know all things in his state of beatitude, his knowledge would remain imperfect; but this seems repugnant to the perfection of beatitude, which takes away all imperfections.  

Obj. 14: If a beatified angel did not know all things, he would, since he is in potency to knowing all things, at one time know something which he did not know previously. Now, this is impossible; for, as Augustine says, *beatified angels' thoughts do not change*; *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 15, ch. 16 (PL 42:1079).)* and they would change if angels came to know something of which they were previously ignorant. Consequently, beatified angels see all things when they see God.  

Obj. 15: The beatific vision is measured by eternity, and for this reason is called eternal life. *(Cf. John 17:3.)* Now, since there is no “before” or “after” in eternity, these sequences are not in the beatific vision either. Hence, [in the vision] something cannot be known which was not known previously. Therefore, our conclusion is the same as before.  

Obj. 16: In the Gospel according to John 15:9, we read the following: *he shall go in, and go out, and shall find pastures*. This is explained as follows in *Spirit and Soul: he shall go in to contemplate the divinity of the Saviour, and go out to gaze upon his humanity. In both he will find glorious refreshment*. *(Pseudo-Augustine (Alcher of Clairvaux), *On the Spirit and the Soul*, ch. 9 (PL 40:785).)* Now, our external sight will nourish itself perfectly upon the humanity of our Saviour, because nothing in his body will be hidden from it. Consequently, the eye of the mind will nourish itself similarly on his divinity, because it will be ignorant of nothing in his divinity, and so will know all things.  

Obj. 17: As is said in *On the Soul*, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.4, 429b3.)* an intellect that understands what is most intelligible does not understand what is less intelligible to a lesser degree but to a greater degree. Now, God is most intelligible. Hence, when an intellect sees God it sees all things.  

Obj. 18: One knows an effect especially by knowing its cause. Now, God is the cause of all things. Consequently, when an intellect sees God it knows all things.  

Obj. 19: Colors painted on a tablet, to become known by sight, would need only a light to shine upon them and make them actually visible. Now, through the illumination of the divine light, the representations of all things are actually intelligible in the divine essence. Consequently, when an intellect sees the divine essence, it sees all things by means of these representations of all things.  

On the contrary (1), we read the following in the Epistle to the Ephesians 3:10: *that the manifold wisdom of God may be made known to the principalities and powers in heavenly places through the Church*. Commenting on this passage, Jerome says that the angels learned the mystery of the Incarnation through the preaching of the Church. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at Eph 3:10, 6.542–43 (PL 114:593); Peter Lombard, *Commentary on Ephesians*, at Eph 3:10 (PL 192:189B); cf. Jerome, *Commentary on Ephesians*, bk. 2, at Eph 3:10 (PL 26:514).)* Consequently, they were ignorant of it before the preaching of the Church, even though they saw God through his essence. Therefore, when they saw God in his essence they did not know all things.  

Furthermore (2), Dionysius writes: *many aspects of the mysteries are hidden from the celestial essences*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Ecclesiastical Hierarchy*, ch. 7, part 3, para. 11 (PG 3:568A).)*  

Furthermore (3), nothing is equal to another’s extension according to dimensional quantity unless it has the same amount of dimensional quantity. *(Augustine, *On the Size of the Soul*, ch. 2 (PL 32:1037).)* Therefore, nothing is equal to another’s extension in virtual quantity unless it has the same amount of efficacy. Now, an angelic intellect is not equal to the divine intellect in perfection. Consequently, it is impossible for an angelic intellect to embrace all things which the divine intellect embraces.  

Furthermore (4), since angels have been made to praise God, *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 2, d. 1, ch. 4.)* they praise him in so far as they know him. But, as is clear from what Chrysostom has written, all angels do not praise him equally. *(John Chrysostom, *Homilies on John*, homily 15, para. 1 (PG 59:98); cf. homily 14.)* Therefore, some know more things in God than others. Nevertheless, even those who know less see God through his essence. Consequently, when they see God through his essence they do not see all things.  

Furthermore (5), knowledge and joy belong to the substance of angelic beatitude. Now, the beatified angels can rejoice over something which they did not rejoice over previously, as, for example, the conversion of a sinner: *there shall be joy before the angels of God upon one* (Luke 15:10). Consequently, they can also know something which they did not know previously. Thus, even though they see God through his essence, there are some things which they do not know.  

Furthermore (6), no created thing can be all-good or all-powerful. Therefore, no created thing can be all-knowing.  

Furthermore (7), God’s knowledge infinitely surpasses that of a creature. Consequently, it is impossible for a creature to know all that God knows.  

Furthermore (8), in Jeremiah 17:9–10 we read the following: *the heart is perverse . . . and unsearchable. Who can know it? I . . . the Lord*. From this it seems that even though the angels see God through his essence, they nevertheless do not know the heart’s secrets and, therefore, do not know all things.  

I answer that in seeing his own essence, God knows some things, namely, the present, past, and future, with the knowledge of vision. Other things, namely, all those which he could make but which nevertheless do not exist, have not existed, and will not exist—these he knows with the knowledge of simple understanding. Now, it seems impossible that any creature seeing the divine essence should know all the things which God knows with his knowledge of simple understanding. It is clear that the number of effects a person knows of a cause is in proportion to the perfection of his knowledge of that cause. For example, the more perfectly one knows a principle of demonstration, the more conclusions can he draw from it. Consequently, if an intellect is to know from its knowledge of a cause all the effects of that cause, it must attain a perfect knowledge of it and, consequently, must comprehend it. Now, as is evident from what has been said previously, *(Above: a. 2.)* it is impossible for a created intellect to comprehend the divine essence. Therefore, it is impossible for any created intellect in seeing the divine essence to know all the things that can be caused by it.  

However, it is possible for a created intellect which sees God to know all that God knows with his knowledge of vision. All hold this is true of the soul of Christ. *(See Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 3, d. 14, ch. 1.)* Opinion is split, however, about the others who see God through his essence. Some say *(William of Auxerre, *Summa aurea*, bk. 2, tract. 5.)* that all angels and all the souls of the blessed necessarily know all things by seeing God’s essence because they are like men who look into a mirror and see all that is reflected there. This opinion, however, seems to contradict the sayings of the saints, *(Above: s.c. 1, 2, 4.)* especially those of Dionysius, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Ecclesiastical Hierarchy*, ch. 6, part 3, para. 6 (PG 3:537B).)* who expressly states that the lower angels rid themselves of their ignorance by the help of higher angels. Hence, we must assert that the higher angels know things of which the lower are ignorant, even though all angels without exception contemplate God. Consequently, we answer that things do not exist in the divine essence as actually distinct; but, as Dionysius says, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 5, para. 8 (PG 3:824C).)* in God all things are one in the way in which many effects are united in one cause. Images reflected in a mirror, however, are actually distinct; consequently, the way in which all things are in the divine essence is more like the way in which effects are in a cause than that in which images are in a mirror. Moreover, one who knows a cause will know all the effects which that cause can produce only if he comprehends that cause, but such comprehension is impossible for a created intellect with regard to the divine essence. Hence, in seeing his essence God alone necessarily knows all the things that he can make. The same is true of the effects that can be produced by the divine essence: one knows more of these the more fully he sees God’s essence. Consequently, the soul of Christ, which sees God more perfectly than all other creatures do is said to know all things, present, past, and future. Other creatures however, do not have this knowledge. Each one of them sees more or fewer effects of God in proportion to the knowledge he has of him.  

Reply Obj. 1: As Peter Lombard points out, *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 2, d. 11, ch. 2.)* when one says that *angels see all things in the Word before they come into being*, his statement should not be understood as referring to all angels, but possibly only to the higher angels. Nor do these see all things perfectly, but, perhaps, only in general. Some things they know, as it were, only implicitly. Or one could also reply that many concepts can be drawn from one object, just as many demonstrations can be made about a triangle; and it is possible for one to know the definition of a triangle and still not know all the things that can be known about a triangle. Therefore, it is one thing to know all things, and another to know all that can be known about things. However, it is sufficiently probable that all who see God through his essence know all creatures at least according to their species. This is what Isidore means when he says angels *know all things in the Word before they come into existence*, *(Isidore of Seville, *Sentences (De summo bono),* bk. 1, ch. 10, para. 17 (PL 83:556C); cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 2, d. 11, ch. 2.)* for coming into existence pertains to things, not to intelligible characters. It is not necessary, however, that an angel know all the intelligible characters of a thing when he knows it; and, even if he were to know all the natural properties which can be known by comprehending its essence, he would not know it according to all the formalities by which it falls under the ordering of divine providence, which ordains one thing to many events. It is about such things that the highest angels enlighten the lower. And this is what Dionysius means when he says that higher angels teach the lower about the intelligible characters of things. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 1 (PG 3:693C).)*  

Reply Obj. 2: That argument holds when sight is joined to a likeness according to the entire potentialities of that likeness. Then sight necessarily knows everything to which the likeness extends. However, a created intellect is not joined to the divine essence in this manner. Consequently, the argument does not hold.  

Reply Obj. 3: The fact that an angel, seeing God, nevertheless does not see all things is due to a defect in his intellect, which is not united to the divine essence according to the total cognoscibility of the essence. But, as mentioned above, *(Above: a. 3, ad 3.)* this defect is not contrary to the purity of the angelic intellect.  

Reply Obj. 4: The ambit of a soul’s natural power includes only those objects which can be understood by the light of the active intellect, and these are forms abstracted from sensible objects. Similarly, the natural power of an angelic intellect includes only those objects that are manifested to it by its own natural light, which is not, however, sufficient to manifest all the things hidden in the wisdom of God. Moreover, the soul receives knowledge of those things which it can know naturally only through a medium that is proportioned to itself. Consequently, even though two persons may apprehend a conclusion by one and the same medium, one will come to know it when the other, with a slower intellect, will not. Similarly, when angels see God’s essence, a higher angel will know many things which a lower angel will not. However, the lower angel gets knowledge of these things through a medium that is more proportioned to him, namely, the light of the higher angel. Hence, it is necessary for one angel to enlighten another.  

Reply Obj. 5: Affection tends toward things themselves, but intellect not only tends toward things but also divides them up into many concepts. Consequently, these concepts are understood but not loved. They can, however, be the principle of love or the reason for it. But, properly speaking, what is loved is the thing itself. Therefore, since the angels who see God through his essence know all creatures, they can love all creatures. But, because they do not apprehend all the intelligible aspects of creatures, they do not love creatures under all the aspects under which they can be loved.  

Reply Obj. 6: Even though God is at an infinite distance from the angelic intellect, angels do not know God according to the mode of his infinity, because they do not know him infinitely. Consequently, it is not necessary that they know all the infinite things that he knows.  

Reply Obj. 7: God could reveal to a person in this life so many things that he would know more about creatures than the intellect of one in heaven knows. Similarly, God could reveal to a person in a lower place in heaven as many things as one in a higher place knows—or even more things. But this is not the point of our present inquiry. The point is: does it follow that a created intellect knows all things from the fact that it sees God’s essence?  

Reply Obj. 8: Gregory’s statement can be understood as referring to things that pertain to the substance of beatitude. *(Cf. Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 2, d. 11, ch. 2; Gregory the Great, *Dialogues*, bk. 4, ch. 33 (PL 77:376B); *Morals on the Book of Job*, bk. 2, ch. 3, para. 3 (PL 75:556D).)* Or one can reply that Gregory is speaking about the sufficiency of the medium, because the divine essence is a medium that is sufficient to make all things known. Gregory accordingly holds that it is not strange if one who sees the divine essence knows future things; but that he does not know all things comes from a defect in the intellect which does not comprehend it.  

Reply Obj. 9: This statement declares that every creature is small for a soul seeing the divine essence; that is, from such a soul no creature is hidden because of its nobility. There can be another reason, however, why it might remain hidden, namely, the fact that it is not joined to the soul by a proportionate medium through which the soul could know it.  

Reply Obj. 10: That argument would hold if a physical eye could take upon itself all the potentialities of physical light. In the problem proposed this is clearly not the case.  

Reply Obj. 11: When an intellect touches God by its cognition; it knows the whole of God, even though it does not know God wholly. Consequently, it does know all that is in God actually. It is not necessary however, that the intellect know the relation God has to all his effects, for this would mean that it knew God in so far as he is the ultimate meaning of all of them.  

Reply Obj. 12: Although the knowledge of creatures does not belong to the substance of beatitude as something that beatifies, nevertheless, some knowledge of creatures pertains to beatitude as being in a way necessary for some act which the beatified person has to perform. For example, to know all who have been placed under his care belongs to the beatitude of an angel. Similarly, it belongs to the beatitude of the saints to know those persons who implore their help and even to know those other creatures from which they ought to rise to the praise of God. Or it might be said that, even if the knowledge of creatures pertain in no way at all to beatitude, it does not follow that all knowledge of creatures is equally related to the beatific vision. For, when a cause is known, some effects are known immediately in it while others still remain rather hidden. For example, some conclusions can be drawn immediately from principles of demonstration while others cannot be except by means of numerous media; and one cannot come to know the latter by himself but must be led to them by someone else. The same is true of knowing the intelligible reasons of effects in their relation to the divine essence: some are hidden but others are manifest. Consequently, when one sees the divine essence he sees some effects but not others.  

Reply Obj. 13: A thing can be in potency to something else in two ways. First, it can be in natural potency; and it is in this way that a created intellect is in potency to knowing all those things that can be manifested to it by its own natural light. A beatified angel is ignorant of none of these things, for were he ignorant of these his intellect would be imperfect. Secondly, a thing can be in merely obediential potency; and it is in this way that a thing is said to be in potency to those things above its nature which God can nevertheless cause in it. If such things are not reduced from potency to act, the potency is not imperfect. Consequently, the intellect of a beatified angel is not imperfect if it does not know all the things which God could reveal to it. Or one could reply that if a potency is ordered to two perfections, and if the second is the final cause of the first, then that potency would not be imperfect if it should have the second without the first—for example, if one were to have health without the help of medicine which causes health. Now, all knowledge of created things is ordered to the knowledge of God. Consequently, granted the impossible position that a created intellect did not know creatures but still knew God, it would not be imperfect. Moreover, an intellect that sees God and knows more creatures is not more perfect because of this knowledge of creatures but rather by the fact that it knows God more perfectly. For this reason, Augustine says: *unhappy the man who knows all things*, that is, created things, *but does not know you. Happy is he who knows you, even if he does not know creatures. Moreover, if he knows you and creatures, he is not happier on account of them, but his happiness comes from you alone*. *(Augustine, *Confessions*, bk. 5, ch. 4 (PL 32:708).)*  

Reply Obj. 14: Change in thought, which is not had in beatified angels, can be understood in two different senses. First, thought is said to change as a result of reasoning from effects to causes or from causes to effects. Now, this discursive thinking is proper to reason and is beneath the clarity of angelic intellects. Second, change in thought can mean succession in the things that are thought about; and here we should note that there cannot be any succession in the knowledge by which angels know things in the Word, because they know many different things in one medium. But there is succession with respect to those things which they know through innate species or through the illuminations of higher angels. Hence, Augustine says: *God moves spiritual creatures through time*; *(Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 8, cc. 20, 22–23 (PL 34:388).)* that is, they are changed in their affections.  

Reply Obj. 15: The beatific vision is that by which God is seen through his essence and things are seen in God. There is no succession in this vision, nor do angels make any progress in it or in beatitude. But they can progress in their vision of things through innate species or through the illumination of superior angels; and this vision is measured, not by eternity, but by time—not by that time which is the measure of the first mobile thing’s motion, about which the Philosopher speaks, *(Aristotle, *Physics* 4.14, 223b22.)* but by non-continuous time, such as that by which creation is measured. This is nothing other than the difference between “before” and “after” in the creation of things or in the succession of acts of understanding had by angels.  

Reply Obj. 16: Christ’s body is finite and can be comprehended by physical sight. The divine essence, however, cannot be comprehended by spiritual sight, because it is infinite. Hence, no comparison can be made.  

Reply Obj. 17: That argument would conclude if the intellect could know perfectly what is most knowable, namely, God himself. Since this is not so, the argument does not hold.  

Reply Obj. 18: As is clear from what we have said, this difficulty from causes and effects can be answered in a similar way.  

Reply Obj. 19: The intelligible representations of things are not in God the way in which colors are on a tablet or wall. This is clear from what we have said above. Hence, the argument proves nothing.  

Replies Sed Contra: We concede these arguments, since their conclusions are true even though they are not reached as they should be.
