# Article 11 — Whether angels know singulars

Eleventh, it is asked whether angels know singulars? *(Parallel texts: below: q. 10, a. 5; *ST* I.57.2; q. 89, a. 4; *SCG* II.100; *In II Sent*., d. 3, q. 2, a. 3; q. 3, a. 3; *Disputed Questions on the Soul*, a. 20; *Quodlibet*, bk. 7, q. 1, a. 3; *On the Separated Substances*, ch. 13, 15.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for according to Boethius: *the universal is known in intellection, the singular, in sensation*. *(Boethius, *Commentary on Porphyry's Isagoge*, bk. 1 (PL 64:85D).)* But angels do not know except through intellection. Therefore, they do not know singulars.  

Obj. 2: But it was said that this statement referred to our intellect, not to that of an angel.  

*On the contrary*, because it is immaterial, our intellect cannot understand singular things. Consequently, it is our material powers of knowing, such as sense and imagination, that know singulars. But an angel’s intellect is more immaterial than man’s. Hence, it does not know singulars.  

Obj. 3: All knowledge takes place through an assimilation of the knower to the known. *(Aquinas commonly attributes this to Aristotle: cf. *In I Sent.*, d. 34, q. 3, a. 1, obj. 4; d. 35, a. 1, obj. 4; Aristotle, *On the Soul* 1.2, 404b15‒26; 1.5, 409b25‒32; *Ethics* 6.1, 1139a10; Isaac Israeli ben Solomon, *Liber de definitionibus*; Aquinas, *Commentary on the De Trinitate of Boethius*, q. 5, a. 3; Algazel, *Metaphysics*, part 1, tract. 3, sent. 2; Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 12.7, 1072b20.)* Now, an angel’s intellect cannot be assimilated to a singular in its singularity because a singular gets its singularity from matter, and an angel’s intellect is entirely removed from matter and from the conditions of matter. Consequently, the intellect of an angel does not know singulars in their singularity.  

Obj. 4: According to the Philosopher, the principle of being and the principle of knowing are one and the same. *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 2.1, 993b30.)* But the principle of being for a singular is an individuated form. Hence, this is the principle of knowing the singular. An angelic intellect, however, receives [forms] without matter and the conditions of matter which’individuate forms. Therefore, it receives only universals, and not singulars.  

Obj. 5: Whatever is received into another is there after the manner of the recipient. *(This same sentence is written in different forms by different authors: *Book of Causes*, comm. 10 [9]; Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 4, para. 1 (PG 3:693B); *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 12, para. 2 (PG 3:293A); Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 4 (PL 63:848C).)* Now, an angelic intellect has a simple and immaterial mode of being. Consequently, the likenesses of particular things existing in an angel’s intellect are there immaterially and simply, and therefore universally. Hence, by their means, he does not know singulars.  

Obj. 6: Different kinds of things cannot be distinctly known in their differences by the same medium. They must be known by separate media, because things known by a common medium are known only in so far as they are one. Now, any form abstracted from matter is common to many particular things. Through such a form, therefore, distinct particulars cannot be known distinctly in their individuality. In an angelic intellect, however, there is no form that is not immaterial. Hence, an angel can in no way know singulars.  

Obj. 7: A universal is opposed to a singular for the reason that it is in the intellect while the singular is outside it. *(Cf. Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.5, 417b19.)* Now, a universal is never outside the intellect. Hence, a singular is never inside it, and, consequently, cannot be known by it.  

Obj. 8: No power ever goes beyond its object. Now, as is said in *On the Soul*, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.6, 430b28.)* the object of the intellect is a quiddity stripped of matter Therefore, since a singular essence is realized in sensible matter, it cannot be known by the intellect.  

Obj. 9: What is known with certainty cannot change, because intellectual knowledge is the same whether the object be absent or present. But, as is said in the *Metaphysics,* *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 7.15, 1040a2.)* certitude cannot be had about things that can change, because such things can become absent. Now, singulars can change, for they are subject to motion and variation. Consequently, they cannot be known by the intellect; and the same must be said as previously.  

Obj. 10: The form within the intellect is more simple than the intellect itself, just as a perfection is more simple than what is perfected. Now, an angelic intellect is immaterial. Therefore, its forms are immaterial. But its forms are not individual unless they are material. Consequently, those forms are universal, and not principles for knowing singulars.  

Obj. 11: As is said in the *Metaphysics,* *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 10.1, 1053a24.)* because it is the principle by which the measured is known, a measure must be homogeneous with the measured. Therefore, a species, which is a principle of knowledge, must be homogeneous with the thing that it makes known. But, being immaterial, the form within an angelic intellect is not homogeneous with a singular. Through such a form, therefore, an angel cannot know a singular.  

Obj. 12: The power had in glory surpasses power had by nature. Therefore, the power of knowing possessed by a glorified human intellect surpasses the natural power had by an angel. But the intellect of a beatified man does not know individual things on earth, for, as Augustine says, *the dead—even the saints—do not know what the living, even their sons, are doing*. *(Augustine, *On the Care of the Dead*, cc. 13–16 (PL 40:606); from *Glossa interlinearis*, at Isaiah 63:16 (in *Glossa ordinaria* 4.506).)* Consequently, angels cannot know singulars by means of their natural knowledge.  

Obj. 13: Were an angel to know singulars, he would know them through either singular or universal species. But he cannot know them through singular species, because then he would have to have within himself as many species as there are singulars. Singulars, however, are potentially infinite. This is evident if one grants that the world will continue in the future as it has in the past—a possibility clearly within God’s power. But then there would be an infinite number of forms in an angel’s intellect; and this is impossible. Likewise, an angel cannot know singulars by means of universals, because in that case he would not have distinct knowledge of individuals, and this would mean that he knew them imperfectly. But imperfect knowledge is not to be attributed to angels. Consequently, angels do not know singulars.  

On the contrary (1), no one can guard what he does not know. But angels guard individual men. This is clear from the Psalms: *for he has given his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all your ways* (Ps 91:11). *(Vulgate: Ps 90:11.)* Therefore, they know singulars.  

Furthermore (2), as is clear from Augustine, one can love only what he knows. *(Augustine, *On the Trinity*, bk. 10, ch. 1 (PL 42:971); bk. 8, ch. 4.)* Now, since angels have charity, they love individual men—even their sensible bodies, for these, too, are to be loved out of charity. Therefore, angels also know men.  

Furthermore (3), according to the Philosopher, one who knows the universal knows the particular; *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.25, 86a11.)* but the opposite is not true. Now, angels know the universal causes of things. Hence, they also know singulars.  

Furthermore (4), as Boethius says, *whatever a lower power can do, a higher power can*. *(Boethius, *Consolation of Philosophy*, bk. 5, prose 4 (PL 63:849B).)* But man’s sensitive and imaginative powers know singulars. Therefore, it is even truer to say that the intellectual power of an angel knows them.  

I answer that some have erred in this matter by saying that angels do not know singulars. *(Moses Maimonides, *Guide for the Perplexed*, bk. 2, ch. 13; Isaac Israeli ben Solomon, *Liber de definitionibus*; cf. Albert the Great, *In II Sent*., d. 3, a. 16; Averroes, *De divinatione per somnum*.)* Such a position is contrary to faith, *(Hebrews 1:14; cf. *ST* I.57.2.)* denying as it does the custody of angels over men, as well as opposed to right reason, because, if angels did not know things which we know, their knowledge would, at least in this respect, be less perfect. This would occasion a remark similar to that made by Aristotle, to the effect that *God would be most stupid if he were ignorant of disharmony* *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 1.5, 410b4.)* that others knew about.  

Once we have excluded this error, we find there are four ways proposed by different philosophers to explain how angels know singulars. Some say that angels know singulars by abstracting species of singulars from things, just as we know singulars by means of our senses. *(Adam Pulchre-Mulieris, *De intelligentiis*.)* But this position is utterly irrational. First of all, as is clear from Dionysius and Augustine, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *On the Divine Names*, ch. 7, para. 2 (PG 3:868B); Augustine, *On the Literal Interpretation of Genesis*, bk. 2, ch. 8 (PL 34:270).)* as well as from what has been said above, *(Above: a. 9.)* angels do not receive their knowledge from things. Second, even granting that they do receive it from things, the forms received would be in an angelic intellect immaterially according to the manner of the intellect receiving them. Consequently, the same difficulty would remain: how could they, by these forms, know singular things, which are individuated by matter?  

Avicenna *(Avicenna, *Metaphysics*, bk. 8, ch. 6.)* proposed another theory and said that God and angels know singulars universally, not individually—meaning that a thing is known individually when it is known as it is here and now, and under all its individuating conditions, and universally, when it is known merely according to its universal principles and universal causes. For example, one knows this eclipse individually when he perceives it with his senses, universally when he foretells it from the motions of the heavens. According to this theory, angels would know singulars universally in a similar fashion; and, because they knew all the universal causes, they would be ignorant of nothing in individual effects. This manner of knowing, however, does not seem to be sufficient; for we assert that angels know singulars even with respect to those things which belong to their singularity, just as they also know men’s individual actions and other things of this sort that pertain to the care of a guardian.  

Hence, a third theory has been proposed by others, namely, those who say that angels have within themselves universal forms of the entire order of the universe. *(Cf. Bonaventure, *In II Sent*., d. 3, part 2, a. 2, q. 1.)* These forms were given angels at the moment of creation, and they apply them to this or to that singular. In this way, they know singulars by means of universal forms. But this theory also seems to be inconsistent, because one thing cannot be applied to another unless that other has been already known previously in some way. For example, we can apply our universal knowledge to singulars which pre-exist in our sensitive knowledge. In angels, however, there is no knowledge other than intellectual in which the knowledge of singulars could pre-exist and so make it possible for the universal forms of their intellect to be applied to singulars. From this it is clear that the application of the universal to the particular demands intellectual knowledge of singulars in angels as a prerequisite; it cannot cause such knowledge.  

Hence, it is more probable to say with the fourth theory that the forms within the intellects of angels can cause knowledge, not only of universals, but also of particulars, without there being any need of such application. This, however, is not true of our intellectual forms, which are related to things in two ways: first, as the cause of things, like the forms of the practical intellect; second, as caused by things, like the forms of the speculative intellect, by which we speculate about natural things. By means of the forms of the practical intellect, however, an artisan makes only a form. Hence, the forms of the practical intellect are likenesses merely of forms; and because every form as a form is universal, an artisan can have only universal knowledge of his product by means of the form of his artistic conception. Knowledge of it as a singular he acquires by means of his senses, just as anyone else does. But were he to make both the matter and the form by means of the forms of his artistic conception, then the latter would be an archetype of both form and matter, and, by its means, he could know the products of his art, not only universally, but also individually, because matter is the principle of individuation. Forms in the speculative intellect, however, arise in us to some extent as the result of the action of things. Now, all action comes from the form. Hence, as far as the power of the agent is concerned, the form that comes to us from things is a likeness only of the form. True, it is also a likeness of material conditions, but this is because it is received in a material organ, which receives in a material way; consequently, it retains some conditions of matter. This is why sense and imagination know singulars. But, since the intellect receives in a manner that is entirely immaterial, the forms within the speculative intellect are likenesses of things only with respect to their forms.  

However, the intelligible archetypes existing in God have a causal relation not only to things’ forms but also to their matter. Hence, they are likenesses of things in both respects. For this reason, God knows a thing through them not only in its universal nature by knowing the form, but also in its singularity by knowing its matter. Moreover, just as natural things come from the divine intellect according to both their form and matter, which constitute them in being, so do the forms within the angelic intellects come from God in order that angels might know both. Consequently, angels know things both in their singularity and universality by means of innate forms since these are similar to the creative forms, namely, the archetypes existing in the divine mind; yet these innate ideas do not create things.  

Reply Obj. 1: The statement of Boethius refers to our intellect, which receives forms from things, not to the angelic intellect, which receives forms immediately from God. The reason for this has already been given.  

Reply Obj. 2: Because the forms received in an angelic intellect are more immaterial than those in our intellect, they are by that very fact more powerful. Consequently, they represent a thing not only according to its formal, but also according to its material, principles.  

Reply Obj. 3: Between the knower and the known there is needed a community, not of nature, but of representation. It is evident that that form of a stone existing within the soul has a far different nature from the form of a stone existing in matter, but, inasmuch as it represents the stone, it is a principle which can lead to knowledge of it. Hence, even though the forms within an angelic intellect are immaterial by their own nature, nothing prevents that intellect from being assimilated by means of them to things in regard to their matter as well as in regard to their forms.  

Reply Obj. 4: A form is a principle of a thing’s being. But it need not be substantially present in an intellect in order to be a principle for knowing the thing; its similitude in the intellect would suffice. For in the soul there is not the form by which a stone exists but only a likeness of that form. *(Example is from Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.8, 431b29.)* Hence, what is necessary is not that the form by which an angelic intellect knows a singular be individuated, but that it be a likeness of the form that is individuated.  

Reply Obj. 5: Forms in an angelic intellect are immaterial; yet they are likenesses of material things, just as are the ideas existing in God, which are much more immaterial. Thus, by their means, singulars can be known.  

Reply Obj. 6: One species can be an intelligible representation of different things in their individuality if it excels them. This is clear from what has been said. *(Above: a. 10, ad 3; in the body of the article.)* Through a medium that is merely equal, however, distinct things cannot be known distinctly.  

Reply Obj. 7: Although it is true that the universal has its act of existence in the intellect, the universal is not the only thing that exists in the intellect. Hence, in this reasoning, the fallacy of the consequent occurs.  

Reply Obj. 8: By means of that species stripped of matter, which the angelic intellect has within itself, it can also understand the material conditions of a thing. This is clear from what has been said. *(Above: in the body of the article.)*  

Reply Obj. 9: By means of the species which it has within itself, an angelic intellect knows a singular, not only according to its substance, but also according to all its accidents. Therefore, it can know a singular no matter how many its accidental variations may be. Consequently, the fact that a singular may vary does not take certitude away from angelic cognition.  

Reply Obj. 10: Our answer to this can be taken from our replies above.  

Reply Obj. 11: In so far as a measure is a principle for knowing the thing measured, it must belong to the same genus as the latter does, but not in all respects. It is evident, for example, that an elbow length is a measure for cloth, but all it has in common with the cloth is quantity; however, this is enough for it to be a measure for cloth. Similarly, the form in an angelic intellect need not have the same mode of existence that a singular existing outside the soul has, since the singular has a material existence, and the afore-mentioned form is immaterial.  

Reply Obj. 12: Saints in glory know in the Word the things that are happening here. This is very clear from what Gregory has written. *(Gregory the Great, *Morals on the Book of Job*, bk. 12, cc. 13, 21 (PL 75:999B); *Dialogues*, bk. 4, ch. 33.)* Moreover, this statement of Augustine should be taken as referring to the natural state. Nor is there any parallel between an angel and a soul, because an angel naturally has forms given to him at creation, and, by means of these, he knows singulars.  

Reply Obj. 13: Forms in an angelic intellect are neither singular, like the forms in imagination or sense, because they are entirely separated from matter, nor universal, as our intellectual forms are, which can represent only a universal nature. Although they exist immaterially in themselves, they nevertheless indicate and express a universal nature and particular conditions.
