# Article 5 — Whether the inferior angels speak to the superior

Fifth, it is asked whether the inferior angels speak to the superior?  *(*ST* I.107.2; *In II Sent*., d. 11, q. 2, a. 3, ad 5; *Commentary on I Corinthians*, ch. 13, lect. 1.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for in its explanation of that verse in the first Epistle to the Corinthians 13:1, *if I speak with the tongues of men and of angels*, the Gloss reads as follows: *these tongues are the means by which the superior angels tell the inferior angels what they are first to learn about the will of God*. *(*Glossa ordinaria*, at 1 Cor 13:1, 6.311; Peter Lombard, *Commentary on 1 Corinthians*, at 1 Cor 13:1 (PL 191:1658C).)* Consequently, speech, an act of the tongue, belongs only to the higher angels.  

Obj. 2: Whenever anyone speaks, something takes place in his listener. Now, in the higher angels, nothing can take place that is caused by the lower, because the higher are not in potency with respect to the lower; rather, the opposite is true, since the superior angels have more act and less potency. Consequently, the lower angels cannot speak to the higher.  

Obj. 3: To the notion of thought speech adds that of infusing knowledge. But the lower angels cannot infuse anything into the higher angels, because in that case they would be acting upon them, and this is impossible. Therefore, the lower do not speak to the higher angels.  

Obj. 4: To illumine is simply to manifest something unknown. Now, angelic speech is for the manifestation of something unknown. Therefore, angelic speech is an illumination. Hence, since inferior angels do not illumine superior angels, it would seem that they also do not speak to them.  

Obj. 5: The angel to whom another angel speaks is in potency to knowing what is expressed in the speech, and, by means of this speech, he comes to know it actually. Consequently, the angel speaking reduces the one spoken to from potency to act. Now, this is not possible for inferior angels with respect to superior angels, because in that case the inferior angels would be more noble. Hence, inferior angels do not speak to superior angels.  

Obj. 6: One person teaches another if he tells him something that he did not know. Consequently, if inferior angels speak to superior angels about their concepts, which the superior are ignorant of, it would seem that they teach the superior angels, and thus perfect them, since, as Dionysius says, to teach is to perfect. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 3, para. 3 (PG 3:168A); *Ecclesiastical Hierarchy*, ch. 5, part. 1.)* But this would be contrary to the hierarchical order, according to which inferior angels are perfected by superior.  

On the contrary, Gregory says: *God speaks to angels, and angels speak to God.* *(Gregory the Great, *Morals on the Book of Job*, bk. 2, ch. 7 (PL 75:559B); cf. ch. 5.)* On the same principle, therefore, superior angels can talk to the inferior, and inferior to the superior.  

I answer that to resolve this question satisfactorily, we must consider how, in angels, illumination differs from speech; and this can be done in the following way. An intellect falls short of knowing something for two reasons. First, the knowable object may be absent. For example, we do not know what has happened in past times or in remote places, if these happenings have not come to our attention. Second, there may be a defect in the intellect. That is, the intellect may not be strong enough to arrive at those truths which it already has in its possession, as, for instance, the intellect has all conclusions within itself in possessing first principles naturally known, but it does not know those conclusions unless it is strengthened by exercise or instruction. Properly speaking, therefore, speech is that by which a person is led to the knowledge of the unknown, because, through speech, something becomes present to him that would otherwise be absent. We have an evident example of this in our own case when one person shows another what the other did not see, and thus, in some sense, makes this thing present to him by means of speech. On the other hand, illumination takes place when the intellect is merely strengthened to know something above that which it already knew. We have explained this previously. *(Above: aa. 1, 3.)*  

It should be noted, however, that both angels and men can have speech without illumination, because sometimes a thing is shown to us through speech only, and this does not strengthen our intellect in any way for knowing more. For example, one can recite to me merely a historical narrative, or one angel can reveal merely his thought to another angel; such matters can be equally known or not known by one having a strong intellect as well as by one having a weak intellect. But illumination in angels and men always has speech joined to it. For we illumine another person inasmuch as we give him some means by which his intellect is strengthened to know something, and this strengthening takes place through speech. In angels, this must also take place through speech, because the superior angel has his knowledge about things through forms that are more universal. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 12, para. 2 (PG 3:292C).)* Consequently, the inferior angel is not proportioned to receive knowledge from the superior unless the latter in some way distinguishes and divides his knowledge by conceiving within himself that about which he wishes to illumine in such a way that it will be comprehensible to the lower angel, and by manifesting this concept to him when he illumines him. Consequently, Dionysius says: *in its providence, every intellectual essence divides and multiplies what it understands by one form, given to it by a godlike being, so that these divisions may act as guiding analogies for those below*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 15, para. 3 (PG 3:332B).)* The same is true of the teacher who, seeing that his pupil cannot grasp things which he himself knows in the same way in which he knows them, makes a special effort to distinguish and multiply his knowledge by means of examples, so that his pupil will grasp his knowledge in this manner.  

Hence, we must admit that angelic speech joined with illumination is found only when superior angels speak to inferior; but the other type of angelic speech is used both when inferior angels speak to superior and when superior speak to inferior.  

Reply Obj. 1: The Gloss is referring here to angelic speech joined with an illumination.  

Reply Obj. 2: The angel who speaks causes nothing in the angel to whom he is speaking. A change does take place, however, in himself; and, by reason of this change, he is known in the manner described above. *(Above: a. 4.)* Hence, there is no necessity for the angel speaking to infuse something into the one he is addressing.  

Reply Obj. 3: The answer just given also solves the third difficulty.  

Reply Obj. 4: The reply is evident from what has been said.  

Reply Obj. 5: It is true that the angel to whom another angel speaks becomes an actual knower from being a potential knower; however, this takes place, not because he is reduced from potency to act, but because the angel who is speaking reduces himself from potency to act by making himself, with respect to some form, in perfect act according to an ordering to the other angel.  

Reply Obj. 6: Properly speaking, teaching is applied only to those things which perfect an intellect. However, the fact that one angel knows the thoughts of another does not pertain to his intellectual perfection, just as it does not pertain to the perfection of my intellect if I learn about things that are not present to me and in no way concern me.
