# Article 7 — Whether one angel speaks to another in such a way that others will not know what he is saying

Seventh, it is asked whether one angel speaks to another in such a way that others will not know what he is saying? *(Parallel text: *ST* I.107.5.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems not, for angelic speech, all that is required is an intelligible species and a turning to another angel. But, if that species and turning are known by one angel, so they are also known by another. Therefore, what an angel says is equally perceived by all.  

Obj. 2: Using the same “nods,” one angel can speak to all the angels. Consequently, if an angel knows the speech by which another angel addresses him, he will also know the speech by which he addresses others.  

Obj. 3: Whoever sees an angel perceives the species by which that angel understands and speaks. But angels always see one another. Therefore, one angel always knows what another is speaking, whether that angel is speaking to him or to some other angel.  

Obj. 4: If a man speaks, he is heard equally by all those standing at the same distance from him, unless there is some defect in one of the hearers, that is, if he is hard of hearing. Now, sometimes another angel is by nature or locally closer to the angel speaking than is the angel who is being addressed. Therefore, the angel speaking is heard by others than those whom he addresses.  

On the contrary, it seems inconsistent to assert that the angels cannot do something which we can do. But a man can confide to another what he has conceived in his heart in such a way that it remains hidden from others. Consequently, an angel is also able to speak to another without letting others know what he is saying.  

I answer that as is clear from what was said previously, *(Above: aa. 4–5.)* the thought of one angel comes to the knowledge of another after the manner of spiritual speech from the fact that the latter angel is actuated by a species not only subjectively but also with reference to the former; and this occurs by the will of the speaker. Now, it is not necessary that things subject to the will should be related to all in the same way, but only as the will determines. Hence, spiritual speech is not related to all angels equally, but only as the will of the angel who is speaking shall determine. Consequently, if, by his own will, an angel is actualized with respect to some intellectual species which he has directed to only one other angel, his speech will be known by that angel only; and, if his species has an order to several, several angels will know it.  

Reply Obj. 1: In angelic speech the turning or direction required is not one that is known but one that makes known. Hence, when one angel turns to another, his turning makes the other know his thought.  

Reply Obj. 2: In general, there is one “nod” by which an angel speaks to all angels; but, in particular, there are as many “nods” as there are turnings to the different angels. Consequently, every angel knows according to the “nod” made to him.  

Reply Obj. 3: Even though one angel sees another, he does not necessarily see the species by which the other angel is actually thinking, unless that other angel turns to him.  

Reply Obj. 4: Human speech makes another person hear by an action physically necessary, namely, by driving air to the ear of the listener. But, as explained previously, *(Above: aa. 4–6.)* this does not take place in angelic speech. Here, everything depends on the will of the angel speaking.
