# Article 3 — Whether one angel cleanses another when he illumines him

Third, it is asked whether one angel cleanses another when he illumines him?  *(Parallel texts: *ST* I.106.2, ad 1; I-II.112.1, ad 3; *In II Sent*., d. 3, q. 3, a. 2; d. 9, q. 1, a. 2; d. 23, q. 2, a. 2; *Compendium theologiae*, ch. 126.)*  

Obj. 1: It seems that he does not, for to be cleansed is to be freed from impurity. But there is no impurity in angels; consequently, one angel cannot cleanse another.  

Obj. 2: But it was said that this cleansing is not from sin but from ignorance or lack of knowledge.  

*On the contrary*, since such ignorance cannot be the result of any sin in the beatified angels, for they have no sin, it must be the result of nature. Now, those things that are natural cannot be removed while the nature remains. Consequently, an angel cannot be freed of his ignorance.  

Obj. 3: Illumination dispels darkness. Now, the only darkness which makes sense in regard to angels is the darkness of ignorance or of lack of understanding. Consequently, if their ignorance is removed when they are cleansed, their being cleansed and their being illumined come to the same thing, and the two should not be distinguished.  

Obj. 4: But it was said that illumination is referred to the end-term, while cleansing is referred to the initial term.  

*On the contrary*, in no way of taking them is there found a term that is other than the end-term or the initial term. Consequently, if those two hierarchical actions, purgation and illumination, are distinguished according as one is referred to the initial term and the other to the end-term, a third hierarchical action cannot be posited; but to deny such a third action is to oppose Dionysius, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 3, para. 2 (PG 3:165B).)* who places the action of perfecting third.  

Obj. 5: As long as a thing is in the state of progression, it is not yet perfect. But, as the Master of the *Sentences* says, *(Peter Lombard, *Sentences*, bk. 2, d. 11, ch. 2.)* angels’ knowledge grows in some way until judgment day. Hence, at the present time, one angel cannot perfect another.  

Obj. 6: Illumination is the cause of perfecting, just as it is the cause of cleansing. Now, a cause must be prior to its effect. Therefore, just as illumination precedes perfection, so does it also precede purgation if the purgation be from ignorance.  

On the contrary, Dionysius distinguishes and orders these actions in this manner, saying: *the hierarchical order is such that some angels are cleansed, others do the cleansing, some are illumined, others illumine, some are perfected, others do the perfecting*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 3, para. 2 (PG 3:165B).)*  

I answer that in angels those three actions pertain merely to their reception of knowledge; for this reason Dionysius says: *purgation, perfection, and illumination are the reception of divine knowledge.* *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 7, para. 3 (PG 3:209C).)* However, the distinction between them should be understood in the following manner. Two terms can be found in any generation or change, namely, the initial term and the end-term. Both, however, are found in different ways in different changes. In some changes the initial term is something contrary to the perfection to be acquired. For example, blackness is the contrary of the whiteness acquired when a thing becomes white. On the other hand, sometimes the perfection to be acquired does not have a contrary directly, but the dispositions existing in the subject before the change are contrary to the dispositions ordered to the perfection to be introduced. This condition is found, for example, when a soul is infused into a body. Again, it sometimes happens that nothing is presupposed for the introduction of the form except a privation or negation. For example, in air that is to be illumined only darkness precedes; and this is removed by the presence of light. Similarly, there is at times only one end-term. For example, the end-term of the process of whitening is whiteness only. At other times, there are two end-terms, one of which is directed to the other. This is clearly the case when elements undergo change: one end-term is a disposition which demands a form, *(Cf. Aquinas, *In IV Sent*., d. 17, q. 1, a. 4, qa. 2, resp.; Bonaventure, *In II Sent*., d. 9, a. 1, q. 3, ad 3.)* the other is the substantial form itself.  

Now, in the reception of knowledge, we find the diversity mentioned above with respect to its initial term, because sometimes, before a person receives knowledge, there exists in him an error contrary to it. Again, at times there are in him beforehand only contrary dispositions, such as impurity of soul, an immoderate occupation with sense-objects, or something of this nature. Again, at other times, there may be in him beforehand only a privation or negation of the knowledge, such as exists in us whose knowledge increases from day to day. It is in this last-named sense that we should understand the initial term of illumination in angels. Moreover, we find that there are two end-terms in the reception of knowledge. The first is that by which the intellect is perfected in order to know something. This end-term may be either an intelligible form, an intelligible light, or any medium of cognition whatsoever. The second end-term is the knowledge itself, which follows; and this is the final term in the reception of knowledge.  

In angels’ cleansing takes place through the simple removal of ignorance in the manner described; for this reason Dionysius says: *to receive divine knowledge is to be cleansed of ignorance*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 7, para. 3 (PG 3:209C).)* The illumination, however, takes place in the first end-term. Hence, Dionysius also says that angels are illumined in so far as something is manifested to them *through a higher illumination.* *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 7, para. 3 (PG 3:209C).)* Finally, “perfection” takes place in the ultimate end-term; and, for this reason, Dionysius says: *they are perfected by the light of resplendent knowledge*. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Celestial Hierarchy*, ch. 7, para. 3 (PG 3:209C).)* In other words, illumination and perfection are understood to differ as the informing of the sense of sight by a species of what is seen differs from the knowledge of the thing seen. Drawing an analogy from the principles laid down above, Dionysius writes that the order of the deacons is to purify neophytes in the faith, that of priests is to illumine them, and that of bishops, to perfect them. *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Ecclesiastical Hierarchy*, ch. 5, part 1, para. 7 (PG 3:508C).)* He said this because deacons exercise their office over catechumens and those possessed by the devils; and, in these persons, there are dispositions contrary to illumination which are removed by the deacons’ ministry. The duty of priests, however, is to teach and communicate the mysteries of the faith to the people; for these are, as it were, means for leading us to God. Finally, the duty of bishops is to uncover the spiritual riches that were concealed in the mystical symbols.  

Reply Obj. 1: As Dionysius says, *(Pseudo-Dionysius, *Ecclesiastical Hierarchy*, ch. 6, part 3, para. 6 (PG 3:537B); ch. 7.)* the cleansing of angels is to be understood as a cleansing, not from any impurity, but from lack of knowledge.  

Reply Obj. 2: A negation or defect is said to be natural in two senses. In the first, it is said to be natural because the presence of such a negation is, as it were, due to nature. For example, not having an intellect is natural to an ass. Now, this kind of natural defect is never removed as long as the nature itself remains. In the second sense, however, a negation is said to be natural because to have some certain perfection is not due to nature. This kind of a negation is found especially when a faculty of the nature is not able to acquire a perfection of the sort mentioned. Such natural defects can be removed. For example, the ignorance boys have is removed, and our lack of glory is removed by the bestowal of glory. Similarly, the ignorance angels have can be removed.  

Reply Obj. 3: Illumination and cleansing are related to each other in the acquisition of knowledge by angels as generation and corruption are related in the acquisition of a natural form. Needless to say, generation and corruption arc one in so far as they are in one subject, but they differ in their formal character.  

Reply Obj. 4: The reply is clear from what has been said.  

Reply Obj. 5: In our proposition, perfection is not taken as referring to all the knowledge an angel has, but only to a single act of knowledge; and he is perfected by this when he is led to the knowledge of some particular thing.  

Reply Obj. 6: Just as form is, in some way, the cause of matter inasmuch as it gives matter actual existence, so, in some way, matter is the cause of form inasmuch as it sustains the form. Similarly, the things coming from form are, in a certain sense, prior to those coming from matter, but in the case of some the opposite is true. Now, because privation is related to matter, the removal of the privation is naturally prior to the introduction of the form according to the order in which matter is prior to form, namely, the order of generation. But the introduction of the form is prior according to that order in which the form is prior to matter, namely, the order of perfection. The same argument can be applied to the orders of illumination and perfection.
