# Chapter 4 — HOW THE ABOVE POSITIONS OF PLATO AND ARISTOTLE DIFFER

18. There are other respects in which Plato and Aristotle differ: First, as has been said above,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote61" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote61); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote61\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Plato posited above the souls of the heavens, a two-fold order of immaterial substances, namely, the intellects and the gods. He declared these gods were the separate intelligible Forms

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote62" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote62); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote62\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
by participation in which the intellects have understanding.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote63" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote63); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote63\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But Aristotle, since he did not posit any separate universals, posited only a single order of things above the souls of the heavens. He held, moreover, that the first among these was the highest God, just as Plato held that the highest God was first in the order of Forms, among which the highest God is the very Idea of the One and the Good. But Aristotle held that this order comprised both, namely, so that it was both understanding and understood, so that thus the highest God would understand not by participation in something higher that would be His perfection but through His own essence.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote64" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote64); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote64\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Aristotle likewise held the same opinion as to the other separate substances ordered below the highest God,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote65" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote65); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote65\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
except that as they fall short of the simplicity of the First and of His highest perfection, their understanding can be perfected by participation in the higher substances.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote66" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote66); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote66\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Thus, according to Aristotle, such substances which are the ends of the heavenly motions are both understanding intellects and intelligible Forms.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote67" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote67); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote67\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But this is not to be understood in the sense that they are the forms or natures of sensible substances, as the Platonists asserted,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote68" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote68); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote68\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
but altogether higher forms.

They differ, secondly, because Plato did not restrict the number of separate intellects to the number of heavenly movements. It was not on this account that Plato was moved to posit separate intellects but rather by considering the very nature of things in themselves. Aristotle, on the other hand, not wishing to be diverted from sensible things, came to posit separate intellectual substances as a result of the sole consideration of motion, as we have said above,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote69" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote69); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote69\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
and for this reason, limited the number of the substance’s to the number of heavenly motions.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote70" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote70); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote70\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Third, they differ because Aristotle did not posit any souls intermediate between the souls of the heavens and the souls of men, as did Plato.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote71" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote71); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote71\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Hence, we find that neither Aristotle nor any of his followers has made mention of demons.This then is what we have gathered from various writings concerning the opinions of Plato and Aristotle on the separate substances.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote72" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote72); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote72\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER V

THE OPINION OF AVICEBRON AND HIS ARGUMENTS FOR IT**
