# Chapter 1 — Introduction

Since we cannot be present at the holy ceremonies in honor of the angels, we should not let this time of devotion go by fruitlessly; rather, such time as we do not spend in singing their praises, we should spend in writing about them. And because our aim is to present as best we can the excellence of the holy angels, we ought to begin with man’s earliest conjectures about the angels. In this way, we shall be in a position to accept whatever we find that agrees with faith, and refute whatever is opposed to Catholic teaching.

**CHAPTER I

THE OPINION OF THE EARLY PHILOSOPHERS AND OF PLATO**

2. The first of those who philosophized on the natures of things believed that only bodies existed and held that the first principles of things were certain corporeal elements, either one or several.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote1" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote1); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote1\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And if they held the first principle to be one, either they thought it was water, as Thales of Miletus did, or air as Diogenes, or fire as Heraclitus.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote2" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote2); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote2\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
If they thought the principles to be several, they thought them to be either finite in number, as did Empedocles, who posited four elements and along with them, two moving principles, namely, love and strife;

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote3" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote3); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote3\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
or infinite in number, as in the case of Democritus and Anaxagoras, both of whom posited an infinite number of minimal parts as the principles of all things, except that Democritus held that these parts were similar in kind, differing only in figure, order, and position.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote4" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote4); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote4\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Anaxagoras, on the other hand, thought that in the case of diverse things which have similar parts, the first principles are the infinite minimal parts.

Moreover, since all of these philosophers had the natural conviction that they should consider as god that which was the first principle of things, just as each of them had attributed to a certain corporeal element the rank of a first principle, so he likewise felt that the name and honor of divinity should be given to this element. These things were mid for this reason, that for all of these men and their followers, it was the case that no incorporeal substances, which we call “angels”, existed.

The Epicureans, however, who traced their origin to the teachings of Democritus, posited certain corporeal gods, resembling human beings in appearance,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote5" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote5); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote5\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
whom they held completely free and without any cares, so that by enjoying ceaseless pleasures, they would be blessed. This teaching had such a far-reaching effect that it influenced even Jewish worshipers of God, a sect of whom, the Sadducees, held that neither angels nor spirits existed.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote6" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote6); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote6\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

3. The early philosophers, however, opposed this opinion in three ways. For although, at first, Anaxagoras with the other Natural Philosophers posited certain material or corporeal principles, nevertheless, he was the first among the philosophers to assert a certain incorporeal principle, namely, an intellect.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote7" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote7); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote7\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Since indeed, according to his view, all corporeal things were mixed in all things, it did not seem possible that corporeal bodies could have been distinguished from one another, unless there existed some principle of distinction which was itself completely unmixed and had nothing in common with corporeal nature.

But, although Anaxagoras’ opinion was much closer to the truth than that of the philosophers who posited only a corporeal nature, yet it falls short of the truth in two respects.

First, because it is apparent from his position that he posited only one separate intellect which had produced this world by distinguishing what was mixed. But since we attribute the establishment of the world to God, from this point of view, we can gather nothing from his opinion as to the incorporeal substances, which we call angels and which axe below God and above corporeal natures.

Second, because concerning the intellect, which he said to be one and unmixed, he seems to have failed in this respect, since he did not sufficiently express its power and eminence. Instead of defining this intellect, which he considered to be separate, as the universal principle of being, he makes it to be only a distinguishing principle, for he did not hold that the bodies that were mixed with one another, received being (esse) from the separate intellect; they received from it only distinctions.

4. Plato therefore proceeded by a more adequate way to refute the opinion of these early Naturalists.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote8" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote8); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote8\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
For since the early Naturalists had held that man could not know the definite truth of things, both because of the continuous passing of corporeal things and because of the deception of the senses by which bodies are known, Plato posited certain natures, separate from the matter of flowing things, in which truth remained abiding.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote9" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote9); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote9\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
By adhering to these natures, our soul knew the truth.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote10" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote10); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote10\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Hence, as the intellect in knowing truth, apprehends certain things beyond the matter of sensible things, Plato thus believed that there existed certain realities separate from sensible things.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote11" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote11); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote11\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Now our intellect uses a two-fold abstraction in arriving at the understanding of truth: One, according as it grasps mathematical numbers, magnitudes, and figures without the understanding of sensible matter; for, in understanding the number two or three, or a line, a surface, a triangle, or a square, there is not included together with it in our apprehension anything pertaining to what is hot or cold, or the like, which is perceptible by sense. The intellect, however, uses another abstraction when it understands something universal without the consideration of something particulax, as when we understand man without including in our understanding anything about Socrates, Plato, or any other individual. The same appears in other cases.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote12" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote12); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote12\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

5. Plato accordingly posited two classes of beings abstracted from sensible things, namely, mathematicals, and universals to which he gave the name of Forms or Ideas.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote13" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote13); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote13\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
There appeared, however, to be this difference between them, namely, that in the case of mathematicals, we can grasp several members of one species, for example, two equal lines or two identical equilateral triangles; whereas with Forms, this is absolutely impossible; man, for example, taken universally is only one in Form.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote14" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote14); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote14\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And so, Plato posited mathematicals between Forms or Ideas and sensible things; since mathematicals agree with sensible things in that many are contained in the same species, and they agree with the Forms in that they are separate from sensible matter.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote15" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote15); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote15\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Further, among Forms themselves, he posited a certain order, on the ground that according as something was simpler in the intellect, so fax was it prior within the order of things. Now that which is first in the intellect is the one and the good; for he understands nothing who does not understand something one, and the one and the good follow upon one another. Hence Plato held that the first Idea of the One, which he called the One-in-itself and the Goodin-itself, was the first principle of things and this Idea he said was the highest good.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote16" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote16); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote16\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Under this One, he established among the substances separate from matter

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote17" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote17); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote17\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
diverse orders of participating and participated beings, all of which orders he called secondary gods,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote18" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote18); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote18\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
as being certain unities below the first simple unity.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote19" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote19); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote19\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

6. Again, inasmuch as all Forms participate in the One, the intellect likewise must participate in the Forms of things in order to have understanding.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote20" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote20); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote20\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Therefore, just as under the highest God, who is the prime unity, simple and unparticipated, other Forms of things exist as secondary unities and gods; so, under the order of these Forms or unities, he posited an order of separate intellects, which participate in the above-mentioned Forms in order to have actual understanding.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote21" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote21); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote21\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Among these intellects, an intellect is higher according as it is nearer to the first intellect which has full participation in the Forms; just as among the gods or unities, that one is higher which shares more perfectly in the first unity.

Although Plato distinguished between the gods and the intellects, he did not mean to imply that the gods could not have understanding. It was his desire, rather, that they should understand in a supra-intellectual manner; that is, instead of understanding by participating in certain Forms, they should have understanding through themselves, with the proviso that every one of them was good and one only through participating in the first One and Good. Again, because we see that certain souls possess understanding which, however, does not befit a soul by the fact that it is a soul, otherwise it would follow that every soul is an intellect and that it would he intelligent in its whole nature, he further posited that under the order of the separate intellects, there was an order of souls, the nobler of which participate in intellectual power, while the lowest of them are lacking in it.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote22" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote22); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote22\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Again, because bodies do not seem to be capable of moving themselves unless they have a soul, Plato held that self-motion belongs to bodies insofar as they participate in soul, since those bodies lacking in this participation, are not moved, unless they are moved by another. Whence he considered it to be an essential property of souls that they move themselves.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote23" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote23); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote23\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

7. In this way, below the order of souls, Plato posited the order of bodies, but in such a manner that the highest of the bodies, namely, the first heavens, which is moved by its own motion, receives motion from the highest soul, and so on to the very lowest of the heavenly bodies. Below these, furthermore, the Platonists placed immortal bodies, namely, aëreal or ethereal bodies, which participate eternally in soul. Some of these they considered to be altogether independent of earthly bodies and these they said to be bodies of demons; others became entombed in earthly bodies, which is the case with human souls.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote24" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote24); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote24\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
For they did not believe that this earthly human body which we touch and see, participates immediately in the soul; rather, there is another nobler body belonging to the soul, incorruptible and everlasting, even ass the soul itself is incorruptible

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote25" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote25); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote25\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
in such wise that the soul with its everlasting and invisible body is in this grosser body not as a form in matter but as a sailor in a ship.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote26" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote26); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote26\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And just as they said that some men were good and others wicked, so too, with the demons. But the heavenly souls, the separate intellects and all the gods, they said were all good.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote27" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote27); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote27\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

In this way, therefore, between us and the highest God, it is clear that they posited four orders, namely, that of the secondary gods, that of the separate intellects, that of the heavenly souls, and that of the good or wicked demons. If all these things were true, then all these intermediate orders would be called by us “angels”, for Sacred Scripture refers to the demons themselves as angels.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote28" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote28); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote28\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
The souls themselves of the heavenly bodies, on the assumption that these are animated, should also be numbered among the angels, as Augustine determines in the *Enchiridion*.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote29" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote29); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote29\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER II

ARISTOTLE’S OPINION**
