# Chapter 2 — ARISTOTLE’S OPINION

8. But the basis of this position is found to be without foundation, for it is not necessary that what the intellect understands separately should have a separate existence (esse) in reality. Hence, neither should we posit separate universals subsisting outside singulars nor likewise mathematicals outside sensible things; for universals are the essences of particular things themselves and mathematicals are certain limits of sensible bodies.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote30" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote30); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote30\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
That is why Aristotle proceeded by a more manifest and surer way, namely, by way of motion, to investigate substances that are separate from matter.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote31" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote31); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote31\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

First, he established by both reason and examples, the fact that everything moved is moved by another; and that if something is said to be self-moved, this is not true of it according to the same part but according to diverse parts of itself, so that one part is moving and another is moved.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote32" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote32); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote32\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Furthermore, since it is not possible to proceed to infinity among movers and things moved, because if the first mover is taken away, it would follow that the other movers as well, would not be moved, we must therefore arrive at some first unmoved mover and some first movable which is moved by itself, in the manner already indicated; for that which is through itself, is prior to and the cause of that which is through another.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote33" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote33); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote33\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Furthermore, Aristotle aimed to establish the eternity of motion and that only an infinite power can move in an infinite time, and likewise that no power belonging to a magnitude is an infinite power.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote34" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote34); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote34\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
From these premises he concluded that the power of the first mover is not a power belonging to any body; therefore the first mover must be incorporeal and without magnitude.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote35" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote35); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote35\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

9. Again, since in the class of movable beings, that which is desirable is present as an unmoved mover, whereas the one desiring is present as a moved mover, Aristotle further concluded that the first unmoved mover is as an appetible good and that the first self-moved mover, namely the first movable, is moved through a desire of that unmoved mover.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote36" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote36); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote36\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
However, we must furthermore keep in mind that in the order of appetites and of appetible objects, the first is that which is through itself an object of understanding, for intellective appetite seeks that which is good through itself; whereas sensitive appetite cannot rise to the appetition of that which is good in itself but only that which appears good. For that which is simply and absolutely good does not fall under the apprehension of sense but only of the intellect.

The first movable, therefore, seeks the first mover with an intellectual appetite and from this it can be inferred that the first movable is appetitive and intelligent. And since only a body is moved, we may infer that the first movable is a body animated by an intellectual soul. But the prime movable, namely the first heavens, is not the only one moved with an eternal motion; but also all the lesser spheres of the heavenly bodies likewise are.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote37" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote37); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote37\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Therefore each of the heavenly bodies is animated by its own soul and each has its own separate appetible object which is the proper end of its motion.

10. There are, accordingly, many separate substances that are in no way united to any bodies; there are, likewise, many intellectual substances united to heavenly bodies. Aristotle attempts to find out the number of these on the basis of the number of motions of the heavenly bodies.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote38" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote38); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote38\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But one of his followers, namely Avicenna

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote39" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote39); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote39\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
assigns the number of these substances not according to the number of motions but rather according to the number of the planets and the other higher bodies, namely, the sphere of the fixed stars and the sphere without stars. For many motions seem to be ordered to the motion of one star, and just as all the other heavenly bodies are under one highest heaven by whose motion all the other bodies are revolving, so likewise, all the other separate substances are ordered under the ‘first separate substance which is the one God. And in like manner, all the souls of the other heavenly bodies are ordered under the soul of the first heaven. Under the heavenly bodies according to Aristotle, the only animated bodies are those of animals and plants.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote40" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote40); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote40\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
For he did not hold that any simple and elementary body could be animated because a simple body cannot be a suitable organ of touch which of necessity belongs to every animal.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote41" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote41); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote41\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Between us and the heavenly bodies, Aristotle did not locate any intervening animate body. Thus, according to the position of Aristotle, between us and the highest God, there exists only a two-fold order of intellectual substances, namely, the separate substances which are the ends of the heavenly motions; and the souls of the spheres, which move through appetite and desire.

11. Now this position of Aristotle seems to be surer because it does not depart greatly from that which is evident according to sense; yet it seems to be less adequate than the position of Plato.

In the first place, there are many things which are evident according to senses, for which an explanation cannot be given on the basis of what Aristotle teaches. For we see in men who are possessed by devils and in the works of sorcerers, certain phenomena which do not seem capable of taking place except through some intellectual substance. Certain followers of Aristotle, as is evident in Porphyry’s letter to Anebontes the Egyptian,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote42" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote42); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote42\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
tried to reduce the causes of these phenomena to the power of the heavenly bodies, as if the works of the sorcerers attained certain unusual and marvelous results under the influence of certain constellations. Furthermore, they say that it is through the influence of the stars that persons who are possessed sometimes foretell future events, for the realization of which there is a certain disposition in nature through the heavenly bodies. But in such cases, there are manifestly certain works which cannot in any way be reduced to a corporeal cause. For example, that people in a trance should speak in a cultivated way of sciences which they do not know, since they are unlettered folk; and that those who have scarcely left the village in which they were born, speak with fluency the vernacular of a foreign people. Likewise, in the works of magicians, certain images are said to be conjured up which answer questions and move about, all of which could not be accomplished by any corporeal cause. Therefore, as the Platonists see it, who could evidently assign a cause of these effects, except to say that these are brought about through demons.

12. Second because it seems unbefitting that immaterial substances should be limited to the number of corporeal substances. For those beings that are higher do not exist for the sake of those that are lower. But on the contrary, that because of which something else exists, is the more noble. Now one cannot sufficiently ascertain the nature of an end from that which is for the end, but rather the other way about. Hence, one cannot adequately ascertain the magnitude and power of higher beings by a consideration of the lower ones. This truth is especially evident in the order of corporeal beings, for it is impossible to reckon the magnitude and number of heavenly bodies from the disposition of the elementary bodies, which are as nothing in comparison to them. But the immaterial substances surpass corporeal substances much more than the heavenly bodies surpass elementary ones. In view of this, the number, power, and disposition of immaterial substances cannot be adequately grasped from the number of heavenly movements.

13. Let us assume the procedure and even the very words of Aristotle’s proof in order that this truth may be more particularly made manifest. Now Aristotle assumes that there can be no motion in the heavens unless it is ordered to the accomplishment of something.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote43" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote43); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote43\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
This assumption is sufficiently probable. For all the substances of the spheres seem to exist for the sake of the stars which are nobler among the heavenly bodies and have a more evident influence. Aristotle further assumes that all the higher substances, impassible and immaterial, are ends, being of themselves most excellent; and this assumption is reasonable.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote44" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote44); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote44\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
For the good has the nature of an end, and hence among beings, those that are by their very nature noblest, are ends for other beings.

But the conclusion of Aristotle that the number of immaterial substances is determined by the number of heavenly movements

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote45" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote45); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote45\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
does not necessarily follow. For an end is both proximate and remote. And the proximate end of the highest heavens is not necessarily the highest immaterial substance which is the all-high God, but it is more probable that there are many orders of immaterial substances between the first immaterial substance and the heavenly body. The lower of these immaterial substances is ordered to the higher as to an end and a heavenly body is ordered to the lowest of these as to its proximate end. For each thing must in some way be proportioned to its proximate end. Accordingly, because of the greatest possible distance between the first immaterial substance and any corporeal substance, it is not probable

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote46" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote46); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote46\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
that a corporeal substance should be ordered to the highest substance as to its proximate end.

14. Hence even Avicenna

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote47" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote47); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote47\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
posited that the immediate end of any of the heavenly movements was not the first cause but a certain first intelligence; and the same can likewise be said of the lower motions of the heavenly bodies. Hence that there should not be more immaterial substances than the number of heavenly motions is not a necessary fact. And Aristotle himself, suspecting this fact, did not advance this position as necessary but only as probable. For when he had enumerated the heavenly movements and before he offered the aforementioned explanation, he states, “Accordingly, it is reasonable to posit so many substances and immovable principles. But why it should be necessary, we shall leave to more capable individuals to pronounce.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote48" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote48); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote48\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Aristotle therefore did not consider himself equal to the task of reaching a necessary conclusion in such matters.

Furthermore, it may seem to someone that Aristotle’s aforesaid reasoning for positing immaterial substances is improper because it is based on the everlastingness of motion, which is contrary to the truth of faith. But if we follow his reason carefully, we can see that his argumentation still holds, even if the eternity of motion is denied. For, just as the infinite power of a mover can be proved from the eternity of motion, so too, the same can be proved from the uniformity of motion. For a mover that cannot always be in motion, must necessarily move at one time faster and at another time more slowly according as his power gradually slows down in motion. But in the domain of heavenly movements there is a complete uniformity. We may therefore conclude that the mover of the first motion has the power to move everlastingly and we would thus arrive at the same conclusion.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote49" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote49); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote49\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER III

HOW ARISTOTLE AND PLATO AGREE**
