# Chapter 10 — THE OPINION OF AVICENNA ON THE COMING OF THINGS FROM THE FIRST PRINCIPLE AND ITS REFUTATION

53. Therefore, other thinkers, considering these and similar points, assert that all things do indeed derive the origin of their being from the first and highest Principle of things Whom we call God, yet they do not do so immediately but in a certain order. Since the First Principle of things is absolutely one and simple, they thought that only that which is one proceeded from Him. And although this effect be more simple and more one than all the other lesser things, it falls short of the simplicity of the First Principle, insofar as it is not its own “to be” but is a substance having “to be”. This substance they call the First Intelligence, from which they say that it is possible for a plurality of beings to proceed. For according as the First Intelligence is turned to the understanding of its simple and first Principle, they say that the second intelligence proceeds from it. Then, according as it understands itself in terms of the intellectuality in it, it produces the soul of the first sphere; but according as it understands itself in terms of that which is potential within it, the first body proceeds from it.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote166" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote166); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote166\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And thus, according to a certain order down to the lowest bodies, they determine the procession of things from the First Principle. This is the position of Avicenna

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote167" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote167); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote167\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
which seems to be presupposed in the *Book of Causes*.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote168" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote168); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote168\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

54. But it is immediately evident that this position is open to criticism. For the good of the universe is stronger than the good of any particular nature. Since the nature of the good and of the end is the same, if anyone withdraws the perfection of the effect from the intention of the agent, he destroys the nature of the good in the particular effects of nature or art. For this reason, Aristotle criticized the opinion of the ancient Naturalists, who posited that the forms of the things that are generated by nature and other natural goods are not intended by nature but come about from the necessity of matter. All the more unbefitting is it therefore that the good of the universe proceed not from the intention of the universal agent but by a certain necessity in the order of things. Moreover, if the good of the universe which consists in the distinction and order of its parts, does come from the intention of the first and universal agent, then it is necessary that the very distinction and order of the parts of the universe preexist in the intellect of the First Principle. And because things proceed from Him as from a principle with an intellect, which acts in accordance with conceived forms, we may not posit that from the First Principle — granting that It is simple in Its essence — there proceeds only one effect; and that it is from another being, according to the mode of its composition and power, there proceeds a multitude, and so on. This would mean that such a distinction and order in things proceeded from a certain necessity in things and not from the intention of the first Agent.

55. Now it can be replied that the distinction and order of things does indeed proceed from the intention of the First Principle, which intends to produce not only the first effect but also the whole universe; yet this happens according to a certain order so that the First Principle produces the first effect immediately and through the mediation of the first effect, He brings things into being in a certain order. But since there is a twofold mode of producing things, namely, one according to change and motion, and the other, without change and motion — as we have already said above

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote169" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote169); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote169\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
— in the mode of production which takes place through motion, we clearly see that some things come to be from the First Principle through the mediation of second causes. For thus we see plants and animals brought into being through motion according to the powers of higher causes, in an orderly way extending to the First Principle. But in the mode of production that takes place without motion through a simple influx of “to be” itself, this cannot take place. But in the mode of production according to which a thing is brought into being, not only does it itself come to be this thing, but it itself comes to be a being absolutely, as we have said.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote170" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote170); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote170\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

56. But there must be a proportion between effect and causes so that, namely, a particular effect corresponds to a particular cause and a universal effect to a universal cause. just as therefore, when through motion some thing itself comes to be this being, an effect of this sort is reduced to a particular cause that moves towards a determinate form, so too, when some thing comes to be absolutely and not by accident a being, this effect must be reduced to the universal cause of being. This, however, is the First Principle, namely God. By way of change and motion, certain effects can be brought into being by the First Principle through the mediation of second causes; but according to that mode of production which takes place without motion, called creation, an effect

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote171" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote171); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote171\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
is reduced to God alone as its Author. In this way, alone, can immaterial substances be brought into being, as well as the matter of such bodies as could not exist prior to form, as we have said concerning the matter of the heavenly bodies which is not in potency to other forms.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote172" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote172); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote172\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
It remains, therefore, that all immaterial substances and the heavenly bodies, which cannot be brought into being through motion, have God alone as the Author of their being. And therefore, that which is prior among them is not the cause of being for those that come later.

57. Moreover, the higher a cause, by so much the higher and more universal is it and by so much does its power extend to more things. But that which is found to be prime in each and every being is especially common to all beings, for whatever is added, contracts that which is given as prior, for that which is understood in a thing as subsequent in reality is related to the prior as act is to potency. But potency is determined through act. Thus, therefore, that which is first in each and every thing must be the effect of the highest power. But the later the effect is, the more it is reduced to the power of a lower cause. Therefore that which is found to be in each and every being — as matter in bodies and what is proportional to immaterial substances — is the proper effect of the prime power of the universal agent. Consequently, it is impossible that certain things should be brought into being by second causes, without presupposing the effect of a higher agent; and thus, no agent after the first, brings a thing as a whole into being, in the sense of producing a being absolutely in itself and not accidentally — which is to create, as we have said.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote173" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote173); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote173\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

58. Again, a given nature or form has a two-fold cause: one, which is essentially and absolutely the cause of such a nature or form; the other, which is the cause that such a nature or form is in such a being. The necessity of this distinction is apparent to any one considering the causes of the things which axe generated. For when a horse is generated, the generating horse is indeed the reason why the nature of horse begins to exist in this being, but it is not the essential cause of equinity. For that which is essentially the cause of a certain specific nature, must be the cause of that nature of all the beings that have that species. Since, then, the generating horse has the same nature, it would have to be its own cause, which is impossible. It remains, therefore, that above all those participating in equinity, there must be some universal cause of the whole species. This cause the Platonists posited as a Form separate from matter in the manner in which the principle of all artifacts is the artistic form that does not exist in matter.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote174" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote174); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote174\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
According to Aristotle’s opinion, however, this universal cause must be located in some one of the heavenly bodies and therefore he himself, distinguishing between these two causes, said that man and the sun generate man.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote175" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote175); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote175\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But when something is caused through motion, the common nature comes to some preexisting being through the coming of a form to matter or to a substance. For in this way, something that has that nature in a particular way, can be through motion the cause of some being, as man is the cause of man or a horse the cause of horse. When a thing is not caused through motion, then such a making refers to the nature itself according to itself. Therefore it must be reduced to that which is essentially the cause of that nature, but not to something which participates in that nature in a particular way. For such a making is compared to the procession or causality which is found in intelligibles, in which the nature of a thing according to itself depends only on a First Principle, just as the nature and essence of six do not depend on three or two but on unity itself. For according to the very nature of its species, six is not twice three but once six; otherwise, there would have to be many substances of one thing. Consequently, when the being of some thing is caused without motion, the causality involved cannot be attributed to any one of the particular beings that participate in being; it must be reduced to the universal and first cause of being, namely God, Who is being itself.

59. Further, the more distant a potency is from act, the greater the power it needs to be reduced to act. For a fire of a greater strength is needed to melt stone than to melt wax. But as between no potency and some potency howsoever undisposed

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote176" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote176); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote176\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
and removed,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote177" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote177); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote177\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
there is no proportion; for between non-being and a being there is no proportion, for the power which produces an effect from no preceding potency infinitely exceeds the power which produces an effect from some potency, however remote it might be. Now an infinite power can belong to other things in a qualified sense, but an infinite power with respect to all of being can belong only to the first agent, which is its own being, and is thereby in all ways infinite, as we said above.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote178" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote178); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote178\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Therefore only the power of the first agent can produce an effect without the presupposition of any potency.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote179" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote179); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote179\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Such, however, must be the production of all ingenerable and incorruptible things, which are produced without motion. Such things, therefore, must be produced by God alone. Hence, it is impossible that immaterial substances should come into being from God according to the order which the aforementioned position laid down.

**CHAPTER XI

CONCERNING PLATO’S OPINION ON THE IDEAS AND ITS REFUTATION**
