# Lecture 2 — The Supreme End of Human Affairs

If our actions have an end that we wish for itself, and if we wish other things for that end, and not each thing on account of another (for this would involve us in an infinite process making our desire useless and in vain), then obviously that will be not only a good end, but a supreme end. [19]  

> A knowledge of it, therefore, will be a great help in human living, for like archers keeping their eye on the target, we will more likely attain our objective. [23]

> This being the case, we must try to determine the general characteristics of this end and to which of the sciences or skills its study pertains. [24]

> It seems undoubtedly to belong to the most truly architectonic science. This, to all appearances, is political science. [25]

> Now, such a science ordains which studies are to be followed in a state, and who are to pursue them and to what extent. Hence, we see the noblest of the operative arts—for example, strategy, domestic economy, and rhetoric—fall under political science. [26]

> Political science in fact makes use of other practical sciences, even legislating what is to be done and what is not to be done. Its end, therefore, embraces the ends of the other practical sciences. For these reasons, then, this end will be the good of man. [29]

> Even though the good be the same for one man and for the whole state, it seems much better and more perfect to procure and preserve the good of the whole state. It is admirable, indeed, to preserve the good of an individual, but it is better still and more divine to do this for a nation and for cities.

> With such a good as the object of our inquiry, we may call our study political science. [30]

> **19**. ***If our actions have an end***. After having stated premises on which his proposition must rest, the Philosopher now begins to manifest it, that is, to show what the principal purpose of this science is.

To achieve this, he does three things.  

First, he shows from what he has already said that there is some supreme end of human affairs.  

Second, at ***a knowledge of it*** (1094a22; [23]), he shows that it is necessary to know this end.  

Third, at ***it seems undoubtedly*** (1094a26; [25]), he shows to which science this knowledge belongs.  

He gives three proofs for the first statement.  

The principal one is this. Whenever an end is such that we wish other things because of it, and we wish it for itself and not because of something else, then that end is not only a good end, but a supreme one. This is obvious from the fact that an end for the sake of which other ends are sought is of greater importance than they, as is evident from his earlier remarks [16]. But it is necessary that there be some such end of human affairs. Therefore, human life or activity has some good end that is supreme.  

**20**. He proves the minor premise by an argument leading to an impossible conclusion. Thus, it is evident from the premises [16] that one end is desired on account of another. Now, either we arrive at some end that is not desired on account of another, or we do not. If we do, the proposition is proved. If, however, we do not find some such end, it follows that every end will be desired on account of another end. In this case, we must proceed to infinity. But it is impossible in ends to proceed to infinity. Therefore, there must be some end that is not desired on account of another.  

**21**. That it is impossible in ends to proceed to infinity is proved also by an argument having an impossible resolution. If we should proceed to infinity in our desire for ends so that one end should always be desired on account of another to infinity, we will never arrive at the point where a man may attain the ends desired. But a man desires fruitlessly what he cannot get; consequently, the end he desires would be useless and vain. But this desire is natural, for it was said above [9] that the good is what all beings naturally desire. Hence it follows that a natural desire would be useless and vain. But this is impossible. The reason is that a natural desire is nothing else but an inclination belonging to things by the disposition of the first mover, and this cannot be frustrated. Therefore, it is impossible that we should proceed to an infinity of ends.  

**22**. It follows that there must be some ultimate end on account of which all other things are desired, while this end itself is not desired on account of anything else. So there must be some supreme end of human affairs.  

**23**. Then, at ***a knowledge of it*** (1094a22), he shows that the knowledge of this end is necessary for man. He proves this in two steps.  

First, he shows that it is necessary for man to know such an end.  

Second, at ***this being the case*** (1094a24), he manifests what man should know about it.  

He concludes then from what has been said [19–22] that it is necessary for man to know that there is a supreme end of human affairs, because this has ***great importance for life* **(1094a22); that is, it is of great help in all phases of human living. This conclusion is apparent for the following reasons. Nothing that is directed to another can be immediately attained by man unless he knows that other to which it is to be directed. An obvious indication of this is found in the example of the archer who shoots straight because he keeps his eye on the target at which he is aiming. Now, man’s whole life ought to be ordered to the supreme and ultimate end of human life. It is necessary, therefore, to have a knowledge of this end of human life. The explanation is that the reason for the means must always be found in the end itself, as also is proved in *Physics* 2. *(*Physics* 2.9.199b34–200b10; see Aquinas, *In* II *phys*., lec. 15, nn. 184–188.)*  

**24**. Then, at ***this being the case*** (1094a24), he shows what ought to be known about that end. He states that, inasmuch as the knowledge of the supreme end is necessary for human life, we must determine what is the supreme end and to which speculative or practical science its study belongs. By “sciences” he understands the speculative sciences, and by “skills” the practical sciences, since there are principles of some operations. According to him, we must make this attempt in order to suggest the difficulty there is in grasping the ultimate end of human life, as in considering all ultimate causes. He says then that we should understand it ***in its general outlines***—that is, with only the evidence of probability—because such a manner of understanding is largely what is available in human things, as he will explain later on [131–34]. Now, the first of these two belongs to the treatise on this science, because such a consideration is about the matter of this science. But the second belongs to the introduction, where its purpose is explained.  

**25**. Therefore, when immediately after this material he says, ***it seems undoubtedly*** (1094a26), he shows to which science the consideration of this end should belong. In regard to this, he does two things.  

First, he gives a reason in proof of his statement.  

Second, at ***now such a science* **(1094a28; [26]), he proves something which he had previously presumed.  

First, then, he states the reason for his proposal, which is this: the supreme end belongs to the most important and most truly architectonic science. This is clear from what was said above, for it was pointed out [16, 20] that the sciences or arts treating of the means to the end are contained under the science or art treating of the end. So it is necessary that the ultimate end should belong to the most important science concerned with the primary and most important end and to the ***truly architectonic*** science as directing the others in what they should do. But political science appears to be ***such***, namely, the most important and the ***most truly architectonic***. Therefore, it belongs to it to consider the supreme end.  

**26**. Then, at ***now such a science*** (1094a28), he proves what he had taken for granted: that political science is such a science.  

First, he proves that it is most truly architectonic;  

second, at ***even though the good* **(1094b7), that it is most important.  

He handles the first statement in two ways.  

First, he ascribes to political science or politics the things that belong to an architectonic science.  

Second, from this he draws the conclusion he intended, at ***political science*** (1094b4).  

There are two characteristics of architectonic knowledge.  

One is that it dictates what is to be done by the art or science subject to it, as the equestrian art dictates the manner of bridle-making.  

The other is that it uses it for its own ends.  

Now, the first of these is applicable to politics or political science both in regard to speculative sciences and in regard to practical sciences—in different ways, however. Political science dictates to a practical science both in the matter of its activity—that is, whether or not it should operate—and in regard to the objects to which its operation is to be directed. It dictates to the smith not only that he use his skill but also that he use it in such a fashion as to make knives of a particular kind. Both are ordered to the end of human living.  

**27**. But political science dictates to a speculative science only as to activity, and not concerning the specification of its proper activity, for, political science orders that some teach or learn geometry. For, actions of this kind, insofar as they are voluntary, belong to the matter of ethics and can be ordered to the goal of human living. But the political ruler does not dictate to geometry what conclusions it should draw about a triangle, for this is not subject to the human will, nor can it be ordered to human living, but it depends on the very nature of things. Therefore, he says that political science ordains which sciences (both practical and speculative) should be studied in a state, who should study them, and for how long.  

**28**. The other characteristic of an architectonic science, the use of subordinate sciences, belongs to political science only in reference to the practical sciences. Hence, he adds that we see ***the most highly esteemed*** (that is, the noblest) ***skills*** (that is, the operative arts) fall under political science—for example, strategy, domestic economy, and rhetoric (1094a28). Political science uses such skills for its own end—that is, for the common good of the state.  

**29**. Then, at ***political science in fact* **(1094b4), he draws a conclusion from two premises. He says that, since political science uses the other practical sciences, as already noted [28], and since it legislates what is to be done and what omitted, as previously stated [27], it follows that the end of this science as architectonic ***embraces*** (or contains under itself) the ends of other practical sciences. Hence, he concludes, the end of political science is ***the good of man***, that is, the supreme end of human things.  

**30**. Then, at ***even though the good be the same*** (1094b7), he shows that political science is the most important science from the very nature of its special end. It is evident that, insofar as a cause is prior and more powerful, it extends to more effects. Hence, insofar as the good, which has the nature of a final cause, is more powerful, it extends to more effects. So, even though the good be the same objective for one man and for the whole state, it seems much better and more perfect ***to attain*** (that is, to procure) and ***preserve*** the good of the whole state than the good of any one man. Certainly it is a part of that love that should exist among men that a man preserve the good even of a single human being. But it is much better and more divine that this be done for a whole people and for states. It is even sometimes desirable that this be done for one state only, but it is much more divine that it be done for a whole people that includes many states. This is said to be ***more divine*** because it shows greater likeness to God who is the ultimate cause of all good. But this good common to one or to several states is ***the object of our inquiry**, that is, of the particular skill*** called political science. Hence, to it, as the most important science, belongs in a most special way the consideration of the ultimate end of human life.  

**31**. But we should note that he says political science is the most important not simply, but in that division of practical sciences that are concerned with human things, the ultimate end of which political science considers. The ultimate end of the whole universe is considered in theology, which is the most important without qualification. He says that it belongs to political science to treat the ultimate end of human life. This, however, he discusses here, since the matter of this book covers the fundamental notions of political science.
