# Chapter 75 — That certain ones are intellectual substances, which are called immaterial

The substances mentioned above, which are called immaterial, must also be intellectual. A being is intellectual for the reason that it is free from matter. This can be perceived from the very way it understands. The intelligible in act and the intellect in act are the same thing. But it is clear that a thing is intelligible in act because it is separated from matter; for we cannot have intellectual knowledge of material things except by abstracting from matter. Accordingly, we must pronounce the same judgment regarding the intellect; that is, whatever is immaterial, is intellectual.  

Furthermore, immaterial substances hold the first place and are supreme among beings; for act is naturally prior to potency. But the intellect is clearly above all other beings; for the intellect uses bodily things as instruments. Therefore, immaterial substances must be intellectual.  

Moreover, the higher a thing is among beings, the closer it draws to the divine likeness. Thus we observe that some things, those pertaining to the lowest degree (such as lifeless beings), share in the divine likeness with respect to existence only; others, for example, plants, share in the divine likeness with respect to existence and life; yet others, such as animals, with respect to knowledge. But the highest way of knowing, and the one most befitting God, is through intellect. Consequently, the highest creatures are intellectual. And because they among all creatures approach most closely to the likeness of God, they are said to be made *in God’s image*.
