# Chapter 222 — That the Blessed Virgin is the mother of Christ

The error of Nestorius, who refused to acknowledge that Blessed Mary is the Mother of God, is likewise excluded. Both Creeds assert that the Son of God was born or was made flesh of the Virgin Mary. The woman of whom any person is born is called his mother, for the reason that she supplies the matter for human conception. Hence the Blessed Virgin Mary, who provided the matter for the conception of the Son of God, should be called the true mother of the Son of God. As far as the definition of motherhood is concerned, the power whereby the matter furnished by a woman is formed does not enter into the question. She who supplied matter to be formed by the Holy Spirit is no less a mother than a woman who supplies matter that is to be formed by the power of male seed.  

If anyone insists on maintaining that the Blessed Virgin ought not to be called the Mother of God because flesh alone and not divinity was derived from her, as Nestorius contended, he clearly is not aware of what he is saying. A woman is not called a mother for the reason that everything that is in her child is derived from her. Man is made up of body and soul; and a man is what he is more in virtue of his soul than in virtue of his body. But no man’s soul is derived from his mother. The soul is either created by God directly, as truth has it, or, if it were produced by traduction, as some have fancied, it would be derived from the father rather than from the mother. For in the generation of other animals, according to the teaching of philosophers, the male gives the soul, the female gives the body.  

Consequently, just as any woman is a mother from the fact that her child’s body is derived from her, so the Blessed Virgin Mary ought to be called the Mother of God if the body of God is derived from her. But we have to hold that it is the body of God if it is taken up into the unity of the person of God’s Son, who is true God. Therefore, all who admit that human nature was assumed by the Son of God into the unity of his person must admit that the Blessed Virgin Mary is the Mother of God. But because Nestorius denied that the person of God and of the man Jesus Christ was one, consequently he denied that the Virgin Mary was the Mother of God.
