# Chapter 152 — How the separation of soul from body is according to nature and how it is contrary to nature

However, it seems that separation of the soul from the body is not incidental but in accord with nature. For man’s body is made up of contrary elements. Now, everything of this sort is naturally corruptible. Therefore, the human body is naturally corruptible. But when the body corrupts the soul must survive as a separate entity if the soul is immortal, as was shown above. Apparently, then, separation of the soul from the body is in accord with nature.  

Therefore, we must consider how this separation is in accord with nature and how it is against nature. We showed above that the rational soul exceeds the capacity of all bodily matter in a way impossible to other forms. This is demonstrated by its intellectual activity, which it exercises without the body. To the end that bodily matter might be fittingly adapted to the soul, some disposition had to be added to the body that would make it suitable matter for such a form. And just as this form receives existence from God alone through creation, that disposition, transcending as it does bodily nature, was conferred on the human body by God alone, for the purpose of preserving the body itself in a state of incorruption, so that it might match the soul’s perpetual existence. This disposition remained in man’s body as long as man’s soul cleaved to God.  

But when man’s soul turned from God by sin, the human body deservedly lost that supernatural disposition whereby it was immoveably subservient to the soul. And hence man incurred the necessity of dying.  

Accordingly, if we regard the nature of the body, death is natural. But if we regard the nature of the soul and the disposition with which the human body was supernaturally endowed in the beginning for the sake of the soul, death is incidental and contrary to nature, inasmuch as union with the body is natural for the soul.
