# Chapter 159 — That only those things that are of the truth of human nature rise up

These remarks about the integrity of risen men should be understood as referring to whatever pertains to the truth of human nature. What is not required for the truth of human nature will not be resumed by risen man. Thus, if all the accretion of matter from the food that has been changed into flesh and blood were to be resumed, the size of risen man would exceed all bounds. The truth of any nature is looked to according to its species and form. Accordingly, all the parts that are consonant with the human species and form will be integrally present in risen man: not only organic parts, but other parts of like nature, such as flesh and sinews, which enter into the composition of the various organs. Of course, not all the matter that was ever contained in those parts during man’s natural life will again be taken up, but only so much as will be enough to constitute the species of the parts in integrity.  

Even though not all the material elements ever possessed by man will arise, we cannot say on this account that man will not be the same individual, or that he will not be complete. For in this present life it is manifest that a man remains one and the same in number from the beginning all the way to the end. That, however, which is in him materially under the aspect of parts does not remain the same, but undergoes gradual flux and reflux (as if the same fire were preserved by logs being consumed and replaced). And then he is a complete man when the species and the quantity due to the species are preserved.
