# Chapter 201 — Other reasons for the Incarnation of the Son of God

There are also other reasons for the divine Incarnation. Man had withdrawn from spiritual things and had delivered himself up wholly to material things, from which he was unable by his own efforts to make his way back to God. Therefore, divine Wisdom, who had made man, took to himself a bodily nature and visited man immersed in things of the body, so that by the mysteries of his bodily life he might recall man to spiritual life.  

Furthermore, the human race had need that God should become man to show forth the dignity of human nature, so that man might not be subjugated either by devils or by things of the body.  

At the same time, by willing to become man, God clearly displayed the immensity of his love for men, so that henceforth men might serve God, no longer out of fear of death, which the first man had scorned, but out of the love of charity.  

Moreover, the Incarnation holds up to man an exemplar of that blessed union whereby the created intellect is joined, in an act of understanding, to the uncreated Spirit. It is no longer unbelievable that a creature’s intellect should be capable of union with God by beholding the divine essence, since the time when God became united to man by taking a human nature to himself.  

Lastly, the Incarnation puts the finishing touch to the whole vast work envisaged by God. For man, who was the last to be created, returns by a sort of circulatory movement to his first beginning, being united by the work of the Incarnation to the very principle of all things.
