# Chapter 1 — In which it is shown that the virtue of hope is necessary for the perfection of Christian life

The Prince of the Apostles has left us an admonition urging us to render an account not only of our faith, but also *of the hope that is in us (*1 Pet 3:15). In the first part of the present work we have briefly set forth the teaching of Christian faith. We now turn to the task of undertaking, in compendious fashion, an exposition of the truths pertaining to hope.  

We should recall that in one kind of knowledge, man’s desire can come to rest. We naturally desire to know truth, and when we do know it, our craving in this direction is satisfied. But in the knowledge of faith man’s desire never comes to rest. For faith is imperfect knowledge: the truths we accept on faith are not seen. This is why the Apostle calls faith *the evidence of things that appear not* (Heb 11:1).  

Accordingly, even when we have faith, there still remains in the soul an impulse toward something else: namely, the perfect vision of the truth assented to by faith, and the attainment of whatever can lead to such truth. Now, we have said that among faith’s other teachings, there is one by which we believe in God’s providence over human affairs. From this, stirrings of hope arise in the believer’s soul that by God’s help he may gain possession of the goods he naturally desires, once he learns of them through faith. Therefore, as we mentioned at the very beginning, next after faith, the virtue of hope is necessary for the perfection of Christian living.
