# Lecture 4

17. Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lain in the grave four days already.  

> 18. Now Bethany was nigh to Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off.

> 19. And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary to comfort them concerning their brother.

> 20. Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him: but Mary sat still in the house.

> 21. Then said Martha to Jesus, Lord if you had been here, my brother had not died.

> 22. But I know, that even now, whatsoever you will ask of God, God will give it you.

> 23. Jesus says to her, your brother shall rise.

> 24. Martha says to him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day.

> 25. Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:

> 26. And whosoever lives and believes in me shall never; die. Believes you this?

> 27. She says to him, Yea, Lord: I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world.

> ALCUIN Our Lord delayed His coming for four days, that the resurrection of Lazarus might be the more glorious: Then when Jesus came, He found that He had lain in the grave four days already.

CHRYS Our Lord had stayed two days, and the messenger had come the day before; the very day on which Lazarus died. This brings us to the fourth day.  

AUG Of the four days many things may be said. They refer to one thing, but one thing viewed in different ways. There is one day of death which the law of our birth brings upon us. Men transgress the natural law, and this is another day of death. The written law is given to men by the hands of Moses, and that is despised - a third day of death. The Gospel comes, and men transgress it - a fourth day of death. But Christ cloth not disdain to awaken even these.  

ALCUIN The first sin was elation of heart, the second assent, the third act, the fourth habit. Now Bethany was nigh to Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off.  

CHRYS Two miles. This is mentioned to account for so many coming from Jerusalem: And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother. But how could the Jews be consoling the beloved of Christ, when they had resolved that whoever confessed Christ should be put out of the synagogue? Perhaps the extreme affliction of the sisters excited their sympathy; or they wished to show respect for their rank. Or perhaps they who came were of the better sort; as we find many of them believed. Their presence is mentioned to do away with all doubt of the real death of Lazarus.  

BEDE Our Lord had not yet entered the town, when Martha met Him: Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was t coming, went and met Him: but Mary sat still in the house.  

CHRYS Martha does not take her sister with her, because she wants to speak with Christ alone, and tell Him what has happened. When her hopes had been raised by Him, then she went her way, and called Mary.  

THEOPHYL At first she does not tell her sister, for fear, if she came, the Jews, present might accompany her. And she did not wish them to know of our Lord’s coming. Then says Martha to Jesus, Lord, if You had been here, my brother had not died.  

CHRYS She believed in Christ, but she believed not as she ought. She did not speak as if He were God: If You had been here, my brother had not died.  

THEOPHYL She did not know that He could have restored her brother as well absent as present.  

CHRYS Nor did she know that He wrought His miracles by His own independent power: But I know that even now, whatsoever You will ask of God, God will give it to you. She only thinks Him some very gifted man.  

AUG She does not say to Him, Bring my brother to life again; for how could she know that it would be good for him to come to life again; she says, I know that You can do so, if You will but what You will do is for your judgment, not for my presumption to determin  

CHRYS But our Lord taught her the truths which she did not know: Jesus says to her your brother shall rise again. Observe, He does not say, I will ask God, that he may rise again, nor on the other hand does He say, I want no help, I do all things of Myself, a declaration which would have been too much for the woman; but something between the two, He shall rise again.  

AUG Shall rise again, is ambiguous: for He does not say, now. And therefore it follows: Martha says to Him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day; of that resurrection I am certain; of this I am doubtful.  

CHRYS She had often heard Christ speak of the resurrection. Jesus now declares His power more plainly: Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life. He needed therefore none to help Him; for if He did, how could He be the resurrection. And if He is the life, He is not confined by place, but is everywhere, and can heal every where.  

ALCUIN I am the resurrection, because I am the life; as through Me he will rise at the general resurrection, through Me he may rise now.  

CHRYS To Martha’s, Whatsoever You shall ask, He replies, He that believes in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: showing her that He is the Giver of all good, and that we must ask of Him. Thus He leads her to the knowledge of high truths; and whereas she had been inquiring only about the resurrection of Lazarus, tells her of a resurrection in which both she and all present would share.  

AUG He that believes in Me, though he were dead: i.e. though his flesh die, his soul shall live till the flesh rise again, never to die more. For faith is the life of the soul. And whomsoever lives, in the flesh, and believes in Me, though he die for a time in the flesh, shall not die eternally.  

ALCUIN Because He has attained to the life of the Spirit, and to an immortal resurrection. Our Lord, from Whom nothing was hid, knew that she believed, but sought from her a confession to salvation: Do you believe this She says to Him, Yea, Lord, I believe that You are the Christ the Son of God, which should come into the world.  

CHRYS She seems not to have understood His words; i.e. she saw that He meant something great, but did not see what that was. She is asked one thing, and answers another.  

AUG When I believed that You were the Son of God, I believed that you were the resurrection, that You were life, and that he that believes in you, though he were dead, shall live.
