# Article 4 — Whether there is only one being in Christ

Fourth, it is asked whether there is only one being in Christ. *(Parallel texts: *ST* III.17.2; *In III Sent*., d. 4, q. 1, qa. 1; d. 6, q. 2, a. 2; *Quodlibet IX*, q. 2, a. 2; *Compendium theologiae*, ch. 211.)* And it seems that there is not.  

Obj. 1: For there is both a divine and a human being in Christ, which cannot be one, because being is not said univocally of God and creatures. Therefore, in Christ there is not only one being but two.  

Obj. 2: Further, to any form corresponds its being. For it is one thing to be white and another to be a man. But in Christ there are two forms; for, *being in the form of God, he took the form of a servant*, as is said in Philippians 2:7, yet he did not set aside the form of God. Therefore, in Christ there is a two-fold being.  

Obj. 3: Further, according to the Philosopher in book 2 of *On the Soul*, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 2.4, 415b13; 415b21–28; Aquinas, *Commentary on Aristotle’s On the Soul*, bk. 2, lect. 7, n. 319.)* in living things, living is being. But there is a two-fold life in Christ, namely, a human life, which he was deprived of through death, and a divine life, which he could not be deprived of through death. Therefore, there is not only one being in Christ, but two.  

On the contrary, whatever is one simply is only one being. But Christ is one simply, as was said above. Therefore, there is only one being in him.  

I answer that, in a certain measure, the solution of this question and the previous one is the same; because something is said to be one and to be a being from the same thing. For being is truly and properly said of the subsisting suppositum. Accidents and non-subsisting forms are said to be insofar as something subsists by means of them, just as whiteness is called a being, insofar as something is white by means of it.  

Now, we should consider that there are some forms by which something is a being, not simply, but in a certain respect, and such are all accidental forms. But there are some forms by which a subsisting thing has being simply, because, obviously, they constitute the substantial being of the subsisting thing. Now, in Christ the subsisting suppositum is the person of the Son of God, which is sustained simply through the divine nature, but it is not sustained simply through the human nature; for the person of the Son of God existed before he assumed humanity, nor was he increased or perfected through having assumed a human nature. But the eternal suppositum is sustained through the human nature insofar as it is this man. Thus, just as Christ is one simply on account of the unity of the suppositum, and two in a certain respect on account of the two natures, so he has one being simply on account of the one being of the eternal suppositum. But there is also another being of this suppositum, not insofar as it is eternal, but insofar as it became a man in time. That being, even if it is not an accidental being, because man is not accidentally predicated of the Son of God, as was said above, *(Above: a. 1.)* nevertheless is not the principal being of its suppositum but its secondary being. Now, if there were two supposita in Christ, then each suppositum would have its own principle being. Thus, there would be a two-fold being in Christ simply.  

Reply Obj. 1: The being of the human nature is not the being of the divine nature. Yet we cannot say simply that Christ is two with regard to being, because each case does not relate in an equal way to the eternal suppositum.  

Reply Obj. 2–3: We must reply similarly to the other objections.
