# Evening Collation

******Beware of false prophets***, etc.***

[27] I have already spoken today about the enemies of the Christian people, namely about false prophets; now we must consider how they entrap us. The Apostle to the Corinthians exposes their traps, and likewise the Lord in the Gospel when he says: ***beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing*** (Matt 7:15), etc. Here the meaning of hypocrisy is understood because hypocrisy is the hiding place of false prophets. Therefore the Apostle in his letter to Timothy says: *The Spirit manifestly says: in the last days* mockers will come, departing *from the faith by giving heed to deceitful spirits and doctrines of demons, speaking lies in the hypocrisy* (1 Tim 4:1)*.* If anyone were to consider the life and character of others, those who lead an austere life by abstaining from marriage and extravagant foods will appear to him as good, but in fact they answer to the spirits of delusion and the teachings of demons.  

[28] Turn your attention now to what he says: **They come to you in sheep's clothing** (Matt 7:15)*.* The sheep are Christ's faithful who obey Christ, hence in John: *My sheep hear my voice* (John 10:27)*.* Sheep's clothing are the moral examples of Christ. Thus it is that the Apostle says: *Be renewed in the spirit of your mind and put on the new man, who according to God is created injustice and holiness of truth* (Eph 4:23-24)*.* Here he touches upon two points, because justice seems outwardly to belong to our neighbors, and holiness of truth seems to belong to the interior disposition of the soul. Hence that saying of Proverbs is fulfilled: *Her entire household is clothed with double garments* (Prov 31:21), namely, inwardly with the virtues of the soul and outwardly with good works.  

[29] To be sure, if false prophets were clothed in both, they would be Christ's sheep. A person approves of others based on their outer clothing, therefore it says: **They come to you in sheep's clothing** (Matt 7:15), which means that they assume exterior activities by which ***they come to you***, since they approach God by interior activities.  

[30] And it should be noted that Christ's sheep are clothed in a fourfold way, namely with the clothing of worship, of justice, of penitence, and of innocence.  

[31] The clothing of worship is the clothing of divine worship which Christ's sheep wear to concentrate on divine worship. Christ's sheep receive this clothing at Baptism, thus the Apostle to the Galatians says: *As many of you as have been baptized in Christ have put on Christ* (Gal 3:27)*.* Christ's sheep put on this clothing when they concentrate on prayer, as we read in Ecclesiasticus: *In ascending the altar of incense, he honored God* (Luke 1:9)*.*  

[32] Hypocrites assume this clothing for two reasons, namely for empty praise and money. For the sake of vainglory they put it on by praying publically and openly, hence in the Gospel it says: *They love to pray in the synagogues and corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men* (Matt 6:5); in the synagogues, that is to say publically. But is it a bad thing to do this, since it is written: *All you angels, bless the Lord*, etc. (Ps 103:20)? Chrysostom says that this has not so much to do with the place than with the soul. The one who prays in secret directs his attention, not to men, but to God. If someone prays alone in his room and he wants to be seen by men, he should pray in public. What then is being forbidden? Namely, that people should not intend to be seen by others when they pray; for this reason Christians must avoid this. Therefore Chrysostom gives this advice: *Let the one praying do nothing unusual so that he may not be able to be seen by men, neither by crying aloud, nor by beating his breast, nor by raising his hands*. But if you are praying in the same manner as the others in your community, then you are praying in secret; however, looking for new methods and gestures applies to what is said about praying in synagogues.  

When praying, a person ought to pray in unison with others, and not look for novel methods as the hypocrites do who pray publically for the sake of vainglory. And moreover, they pray long prayers for money, thus it says in the Gospel: *Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, because you devour the houses of widows praying long prayers* (Matt 23:13), namely, they pray in order to obtain money. Some, in a most shameful way, obtain money from defenseless women: they pray *long prayers* so that they may become devout women and receive gifts from them. But is there anything evil in praying long prayers? Augustine answers by saying: *Verboseness should be absent from prayer, but much prayer should not be lacking, if only the intention continues steadfastly; for very often this work is accomplished more by sighs than by words, more by tears than by speaking*.  

[33] Another clothing of Christ's sheep is the clothing of justice and mercy, about which Job says: *I was clothed with justice, as with a robe, I was an eye to the blind and afoot to the lame; I was the father of the poor* (Job 29:14-16)*.* The hypocrites assume this clothing, therefore we read in the Gospel: *Beware of practicing your piety before others in order to be seen by them; when you give alms, sound no trumpet, as the hypocrites do* (Matt 6:1-2)*.* Chrysostom says that the trumpet is every deed or word by which boasting is shown. For example: you give alms, but you would not give it except to a more reputable person who can repay you: this is a trumpet. Moreover, you act like a trumpet when you wish to give alms secretly so as to appear more praiseworthy.  

[34] The third clothing of Christ's sheep is the clothing of penitence, about which the Psalmist says: *I made haircloth my garment* (Ps 69:11)*.* The hypocrites use this clothing, namely a deceptive and austere way of life, thus we find in the Gospel: *When you fast, do not look sad, like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces that their fasting may be seen by men* (Matt 6:16)*.* They seek and crave this so that their fasting may be seen by men. Augustine writes: *In this chapter we must turn our attention to the fact that it is possible to boast not only of the splendor of material things, but even of filthy squalor, and that this is all the more dangerous when it is disingenuously done in the name of the Lord's service*. The Philosopher says that [if] a man were to wear apparel that is beneath his station in life, this can be considered a form of boasting. These exterior things act as certain kinds of insignias: in an army every battle line carries its own standard; this is not presumptuous. In whatever state of life a person finds himself, he should be content with ordinary things and not seek too much after worthless objects, for as Augustine says: *We should neither make too much use of expensive things nor of cheap things*. And why is this? Because we are able to seek glory in these two ways. Concerning this cheap clothing it is said in Zechariah: *They shall not put on a garment of sackcloth* (Zech 13:4), namely, so that they do [not] pretend.  

[35] The fourth clothing of Christ's sheep is innocence, which is clean and beautiful, thus we read in Proverbs: *Strength and beauty are her clothing* (Prov 31:25)*.* The hypocrites assume this clothing, namely by feigning piety and purity, as we read in the Gospel: *Woe to you hypocrites who are like whitewashed sepulchres*, namely those things which appear to men to have been whitewashed, *but inside they are full of dead men's bones and all filthiness* (Matt 23:27), that is, violent theft and indecency. And Chrysostom says: *If it is vile to appear to be, it is even more vile actually to be so; if it is beautiful to appear, it is even more beautiful actually to be so*. Such as these come in sheep's clothing.  

[36] But it should be noted that others, who are not sheep, come in sheep's clothing, such as those who seek temporal gain and honors for themselves. Augustine distinguishes them by saying that one plays the part of a thief, another of a wolf, another of a shepherd, and another of a mercenary, since a shepherd seeks the good of his sheep, a wolf and a thief seek the sheep's destruction, and a mercenary seeks his own gain from the sheep. Augustine says that *We must tolerate the mercenary, love the shepherd, and flee the wolf*, and this is what our Lord says: **they come to you in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves** (Matt 7:15)*.*  

[37] It must be noted that hypocrites are like wolves for four reasons, because wolves snatch away sheep, they do not spare them, they scatter them, and they persist in their own evil.  

[38] Now in the first place, hypocrites are like wolves because wolves snatch away sheep, and hypocrites snatch away the goods of the soul and body, they lead men astray, and physically pursue them and deprive them of their possessions; therefore we read in Ezekiel: *Her princes in the midst of her are like wolves tearing the prey, shedding blood, destroying souls to get dishonest gain* (Ez 22:27)*.*  

[39] Secondly, hypocrites are like wolves because wolves scatter sheep, hence it says in the Gospel: *The wolf snatches and scatters the sheep* (Jn 10:12)*.* The Lord says: *He who is not with me is against me*; therefore *and he who does not gather with me scatters* (Matt 12:30)*.* But what does it mean to scatter? Certainly when someone departs from what the Church teaches, he is scattered.  

[40] Thirdly, hypocrites are like wolves because they are altogether merciless; hence in Acts the Apostle says: *I know that after my departure fierce wolves will come in among you, not sparing the flock* (Acts 20:29)*.* Whoever would murder a man and not spare him as long as he could gain one penny would be called extremely cruel; this is the way hypocrites act. Since the life of the soul is more precious than the life of the body, hypocrites seduce souls in order that they may have honors and adherents.  

[41] Fourthly, hypocrites are like wolves because wolves persist in their own evil, as it says in Sophonias: *Her judges are wolves even until evening* (Zeph 3:3), that is, even unto the end. Therefore, for the preceding four reasons, false prophets, like wolves, must be avoided.  

[42] But how are wolves identified? This is shown when it says: *You will know them by their fruits* (Matt 7:16)*.* Augustine says that many people are deceived when they mistake sheep's clothing for fruits. Some simple people see others performing good outward actions such as fasting, praying, and other such things which are sheep's clothing, but it is not their own clothing. However, Christ's sheep should not have a hatred for their own clothing, even if wolves do cover themselves with it.  

[43] But what properly speaking are the fruits of sheep? We can say that sheep possess four fruits, and that from them we can identify wolves or hypocrites. The first fruit consists in affection, the second in speech, the third in activity, and the fourth in tribulation. The first is the fruit of the heart, the second of the mouth, the third of action, and the fourth of patience and fortitude.  

[44] Now in the first place, Christ's sheep or saints enjoy the proper fruit of the heart, which is the love of God and neighbor; thus the Apostle says: *But the fruit of the Spirit is joy, charity, and peace* (Gal 5:22)*.* But hypocrites, because they love honors, have another fruit, namely, the fruit of ambition; thus Isaiah says: *I will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the king of Assyria* (Is 10:12)*.* Hypocrites *love the first places at feasts and the first chairs in the synagogues* (Matt 23:6)*.* If anyone wishes to be honored and he displays humility outwardly, then his clothing does not correspond to his fruit.  

[45] Another fruit of Christ's sheep is in their speech, since good men always say something good and speak about good; thus the Apostle to the Hebrews says: *By him let us offer the sacrifice, the fruit of lips* corresponding *to his name* (Heb 13:15)*.* If anyone says something that is incongruent with his actions, then his clothes do not correspond to his fruit, thus we read in Proverbs: *Of the fruit of a man's mouth will his belly be satisfied* (Prov 18:20)*.* It is difficult for a heart filled with jealousy not to let anything slip out from it at any moment, since *out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks* (Lk 6:45)*.* Therefore Gregory says: *While depraved people do speak openly about suitable topics, it is only with the greatest difficulty that they do not let roving secrets spew forth*.  

[46] The third fruit of Christ's sheep by which we can identify hypocrites belongs to good actions, because in good actions there is good fruit, as the Apostle says: *You have your fruit unto sanctification* (Rom 6:22)*.* However, in bad actions there is bad fruit, as we read in Proverbs: *The fruit of the wicked is to sin* (Prov 10:16), that is to the work of sin. In a certain sermon Augustine says: *When anyone in the profession of Christianity draws men's eyes upon himself by an unusually filthy and foul garment, if this is done voluntarily and is not suffered out of necessity, then by his other activities it can be determined whether he is doing this out of contempt for stylish dress or whether he is doing it for adulation*. It sometimes happens that a man will put on an attractive garment out of humility, but at other times he will do it for adulation. Consider his activities among other men: if he is among other men and spurns their adulation, then he is doing it out of humility; if not, as Augustine says, it can be determined from his activities: because those, who on the one hand wear cheap garments, but on the other hand prefer the signs of penitence and gentleness are the sheep of Christ; if not, they are frauds. *Therefore it is said that a hypocrite is easily recognized. The way through which we have been commanded to walk is an arduous one; and the hypocrite does not choose it*.  

[47] Again, hypocrites make a display of their meekness, but when they have the opportunity of persecuting, then they do their utmost to persecute, hence Gregory says: *If any trial of faith occurs, immediately the wolf ravenous at heart strips himself of his sheep's skin; and shows by persecuting how great his anger is against the good*.  

[48] A fourth sign by which hypocrites are recognized is in time of tribulation, therefore as it says in Proverbs: *In the fruits of the wicked is trouble: the learning of a man is known by patience* (Prov 19:11)*.* Augustine commenting on the Lord's Sermon on the Mount, describes hypocrites this way: *For when by any temptations those things began to be withdrawn or denied, which they either attained or desired to attain under this cover, it must appear to be either a wolf in sheep's clothing, or a sheep in its own*. For this reason James says in his canonical letter: *If any man therefore will clean himself from these, he will be a vessel unto honor, prepared to the Lord* (2 Tim 2:21)*.* May he grant us to stand before him who with the Father, etc.
