# Surge.S1.7

Still others are held back in their laziness by error.Reading *errore* instead of *envie*, in light of what Aquinas says further on about how Scripture calls us back from error. The word *envie* is unusual and may be a scribal error. However, sense can be made of the word “envy,” if it is understood as the desire to not share goods with others in order that one may not be surpassed by them. Aquinas says elsewhere: *pusillanimes sunt invidi, quia omnia reputant magna, et quidquid boni alicui accidat, reputant se in magno superatos esse*, “the small-spirited are envious, because they deem every matter to be something great, and whatever good happens to another, they deem that they themselves have been surpassed in something great” (*ST* II-II.36.1, ad 3). And also: *memoria praeteritorum bonorum, inquantum fuerunt habita, delectationem causat, sed inquantum sunt amissa, causant tristitiam. Et inquantum ab aliis habentur, causant invidiam, quia hoc maxime videtur gloriae propriae derogare*, “the memory of past goods, inasmuch as one has had them, causes pleasure. . . . But inasmuch as they are had by others, they cause envy, because this especially seems to detract from one’s own glory” (*ST* II-II.36.1, ad 4). To these it seems that their own goods are sufficient. Such was that rich man who said, *my soul, you have many goods* stored away *for many years; take your rest* (Luke 12:19)—you need not arise with the others in the morning. But to him is said, *you fool, this very night your soul is required of you, and whose shall those things be which you have provided?* (Luke 12:20). Scripture, enlightening the intellect, calls us back from this error in the Psalm: *send forth your light and your truth; they have led me* (Ps 42:3); they have not caused me to rest.
