# Lecture 30

a38. It is also clear that the loss of any one of the senses entails the loss of a corresponding portion of knowledge, and that,

a39. since we learn either by induction or by demonstration, this knowledge cannot be acquired. Thus demonstration develops from universals, induction from particulars; but since it is possible to familiarize the pupil with even the so-called mathematical abstractions only through induction — i.e. only because each subject genus possesses, in virtue of a determinate mathematical character, certain properties which can be treated as separate even though they do not exist in isolation — it is consequently impossible to come to grasp universals except through induction. But induction is impossible for those who have not sense-perception. For it is sense-perception alone which is adequate for grasping the particulars: they cannot be objects of scientific knowledge, because neither can universals give us knowledge of them without induction, nor can we get it through induction without sense-perception.

After the Philosopher has determined concerning ignorance through deception which is caused by a syllogism, he now determines concerning the ignorance of simple negation which is produced without a syllogism. First, he shows in which type of person this ignorance is had of necessity. Secondly, he proves his proposition (81a39).

He says therefore first (81a38) that if a person lacks any of the senses, say, sight or hearing, then necessarily the science of the sensible objects proper to those senses will be lacking. Thus, if a person lacks the sense of sight, then of necessity the science of colors will be lacking in him. And so he will have ignorance of negation in regard to colors, being entirely ignorant of colors. However, this must be understood of persons who never had the sense of sight, as a person born blind. But if someone loses the sight he once had, he does not on that account necessarily lack a science of colors, because the memory of colors previously sensed remains in him.

But it is possible that ignorance of negation be had of certain things which can nevertheless be known through a sense we possess.. For example, if someone with sight were always in the dark, he would de facto lack a science of colors, but not of necessity, because he could acquire it by sensing colors-which does not occur in one who lacks the sense of sight. Hence he adds that it is impossible to receive it because one who lacks the power of sight cannot even acquire a knowledge of colors.

Then (81a39) he proves his proposition on the ground that there are two ways of acquiring science: one is through demonstration, and the other is through induction, as we have stated in the beginning of this book. But these two ways differ, because demonstration proceeds from universals, but induction from particulars. Therefore, if any universals from which demonstration proceeds could be known without induction, it would follow that a person could acquire science of things of which he does not have sense experience. But it is impossible that universals be known scientifically without induction. This is quite obvious in sensible things, because we receive the universal aspect in them through the experience which we have in regard to sensible things, as is explained in *Metaphysics* I. But this might be doubted in things which are abstract, as in mathematics. For although experience begins from sense, as it is stated in *Metaphysics* 1, it seems that this plays no role in studying things already isolated or abstracted from sensible matter.

Therefore, to exclude this he says that even those things that are abstract happen to be made known through induction, because in each genus of abstract things are certain particulars which are not isolable from sensible matter, so far as each of them is a “this something.” For although “line” is studied in isolation from its sensible matter, nevertheless “this line”, which is in sensible matter, so far forth as it is individualized, cannot be so isolated, because its individuation is from this matter. Furthermore, the principles of abstracted [isolated] things, from which demonstrations regarding them are formed, are not made manifest to us except from certain particulars which we perceive by sense. Thus, from the fact that we see some single sensible whole we are led to know what a whole is and what a part, and we know that every whole is greater than its part by considering this in many. Thus the universals from which demonstration proceeds are made known to us only through induction.

Now men who lack any of the senses cannot make an induction from singulars pertaining to that sense, because sense is the sole knower of the singulars from which induction proceeds. Hence such singulars are utterly unknown, because it does not occur that anyone lacking a sense receives science of such singulars: first, because he cannot demonstrate from universals without induction through which universals are known, as has been said; secondly, because nothing can be known through induction without the sense which is concerned with the singulars from which induction proceeds.

It should be noted that by these words of the Philosopher two positions are excluded: the first is Plato’s, who stated that we do not have science of things except through Forms participated from ideas. If this were so, universals could be made known to us without induction, and we would be able to acquire a science of things of which we have no sense. Hence Aristotle also uses this argument against Plato at the end of *Metaphysics* I. The second is the position of those who claim that in this life we can know separated substances by understanding their quiddities, which however cannot be known through sensible objects which we know and which are entirely transcended by them. Hence if they were known according to their essences, it would follow that some things would be known without induction and sense perception, which the Philosopher here denies even in regard to abstracted things.
