# Lecture 7 — Discussion of two errors—exclusion of the first one

72b5. Some hold that, owing to the necessity of knowing the primary premises, there is no scientific knowledge. Others think there is, but that all truths are demonstrable. Neither doctrine is either true or a necessary deduction from the premises.  

> 72b7. The first school, assuming that there is no way of knowing other than by demonstration, maintain that an infinite regress is involved, on the ground that if behind the prior stands no primary, we could not know the posterior through the prior (wherein they are right, for one cannot traverse an infinite series): if on the other hand — they say — the series terminates and there are primary premises, yet these are unknowable because incapable of demonstration, which according to them is the only form of knowledge. And since thus one cannot know the primary premises, knowledge of the conclusions which follow from them is not pure scientific knowledge nor properly knowing at all, but rests on the mere supposition that the premises are true.

> 72b15. The other party agree with them as regards knowing, holding that it is only possible by demonstration, but they see no difficulty in holding that all truths are demonstrated, on the ground that demonstration may be circular and reciprocal.

> 72b18. Our own doctrine is that not all knowledge is demonstrative: on the contrary, knowledge of the immediate premises is independent of demonstration. The necessity of this is obvious; for since we must know the prior premises from which the demonstration is drawn, and since the regress must end in immediate truths, those truths must be indemonstrable.

> 72b23. Such, then, is our doctrine, and in addition we maintain that besides scientific knowledge there is its originative source which enables us to recognize the definitions.

> ***Some hold that, owing to the necessity***. After determining about the knowledge of the principles of demonstration, the Philosopher now excludes the errors which have arisen from these determinations.

Concerning this he does three things.  

First, he states the errors.  

Second, the reasons they erred, at: ***the first school*** (72b8; [62]).  

Third, he removes the roots of these reasons, at: ***our own doctrine*** (72b18; [64]).  

He says therefore first (72b5), that two contrary errors have arisen from one of the truths established above. For it has been established above that the principles of demonstration ***must be known*** and must be even better known. But the first of these is sufficient for our purpose. ***For some, basing themselves on*** this first statement, ***have come to believe*** that there is no ***science*** of anything, ***whereas others*** believe that there is science, even to the extent of believing that there is science of ***everything*** through demonstration. But ***neither*** of these positions is ***true*** and neither follows necessarily from their reasons.  

Then, at: ***the first school*** (72b7) he presents the reasons why they have fallen into these errors.  

And first of all he presents the reason given by those who say that there is no science, and it is this: The principles of demonstration either proceed to infinity or there is a halt somewhere. But if there is a process ***to infinity***, nothing in that process can be taken as being ***first***, because one cannot ***exhaust*** an ***infinite series*** and reach what is first. Consequently, it is not possible to know what is first. They are ***correct*** in thus arguing, for the later things cannot be known unless the prior ones are known. On the other hand, if there is a halt in the principles, then even so, the first things are still not known, if the only way to know scientifically is through demonstration. For first things do not have prior principles through which they are demonstrated. But if ***the first things*** are not known, it follows again that the later things are not ***known in the strict and proper sense, but*** only on ***condition*** that there are principles. For it is not possible for something to be known in virtue of something not known, except on condition that that unknown be a principle. So in either case, whether the principles stop or go on to infinity, it follows that there is no science of anything.  

Second, at: ***the other party agree with them*** (72b15), he presents the reasoning of those who say that there is science of everything through demonstration, because to them there is science of everything through demonstration, because to their basic premise-the only way to know scientifically is ***by demonstration***—they added another, namely, that one may demonstrate ***circularly***. From these premises it followed that even if a limit is reached in the series of the principles of demonstration, the first principles are still known through demonstration, because, they said, those principles were demonstrated by previous ones. For a circular demonstration is one which is ***reciprocal***, that is, something which was first a principle is later a conclusion, and vice versa.  

Then, at: ***our own doctrine*** (72b18) he cuts away the false bases of these arguments.  

First, their supposition that the only way to know scientifically is by demonstration.  

Second, their statement that it is legitimate to demonstrate circularly, at: ***now, demonstration must be based*** (72b25; [68]).  

He says therefore first (72b18), that not all scientific knowledge is demonstrative, that is, obtained through demonstration, ***but the scientific knowledge of immediate*** principles is indemonstrable, that is, not obtained by demonstration.  

However, it should be noted that Aristotle is here taking ‘science’ in a wide sense to include any knowledge that is certain, and not in the sense in which science is set off against understanding, according to the dictum that science deals with conclusions and understanding [intuition] with principles.  

But that it is necessary for some things to be held as certain without demonstration he proves in the following way: ***It is necessary that the prior things from which a demonstration proceeds be known in a scientific way***. Furthermore, these must be ***ultimately*** reduced to something ***immediate***; otherwise one would be forced to admit that there is an actual infinitude of middles between two extremes—in this case between the subject and predicate. Again, one would have to admit that no two extremes could be found between which there would not be an infinitude of middles. But as it is, the middles are such that it is possible to find two things which are immediate. But immediate principles, being ***prior***, must ***be indemonstrable***. Thus it is clear that it is necessary for some things to be scientifically known without demonstration.  

Therefore, if someone were to ask how the science of immediate principles is possessed, the answer would be that ***not only*** are they known in a scientific manner, but knowledge of them is ***the source of a science***. For one passes from the knowledge of principles to a demonstration of conclusion on which science, properly speaking, bears. But those immediate principles are not made known through an additional middle but through an understanding of their own terms. For as soon as it is known what a whole is and what a part is, it is known that every whole is greater than its part, because in such a proposition, as has been stated above, the predicate is included in the very notion of the subject. And therefore it is reasonable that the knowledge of these principles is the cause of the knowledge of conclusions, because always, that which exists in virtue of itself is the cause of that which exists in virtue of something else.
