# Lecture 8 — The second error is excluded by showing that circular demonstration is not acceptable

72b25. Now, demonstration must be based on premises prior to and better known than the conclusion. And the same things cannot simultaneously be both prior and posterior to one another: so circular demonstration is clearly not possible in the unqualified sense of ‘demonstration’,  

> 72b26. but only possible if ‘demonstration’ be extended to include that other method of argument which rests on a distinction between truths prior to us and truths without qualification prior, that is, the method by which induction produces knowledge. But if we accept this extension of its meaning, our definition of unqualified knowledge will prove faulty; for there seem to be two kinds of it. Perhaps, however, the second form of demonstration, that which proceeds from truths better known to us, is not demonstration in the unqualified sense of the term.

> 72b32. The advocates of circular demonstration are not only faced with the difficulty we have just stated: in addition their theory reduces to the mere statement that if a thing exists, then it does exist—an easy way of proving anything. That this is so can be clearly shown by taking three terms, for to constitute the circle it makes no difference whether many terms or few or even only two are taken. Thus by direct proof, if A is, B must be; if B is, C must be; therefore if A is, C must be. Since then, by the circular proof, if A is, B must be, and if B is, A must be, A may be substituted for C above. Then ‘if B is, A must be’ equals ‘if B is, C must be’, which above gave the conclusion ‘if A is, C must be’: but C and A have been identified. Consequently the upholders of circular demonstration are in the position of saying that if A is, A must be—a simple way of proving anything.

> 73a6. Moreover, even such circular demonstration is impossible except in the case of attributes that imply one another, viz. ‘peculiar’ properties.

> 73a7. Now, it has been shown that the positing of one thing—be it one term or one premise—never involves a necessary consequent: two premises constitute the first and smallest foundation for drawing a conclusion at all and therefore a fortiori for the demonstrative syllogism of science. If, then, A is implied in B and C, and B and C are reciprocally implied in one another and in A, it is possible, as has been shown in my writings on the syllogism, to prove all the assumptions on which the original conclusion rested, by circular demonstration in the first figure. But it has also been shown that in the other figures either no conclusion is possible, or at least none which proves both the original premises. Propositions the terms of which are not convertible cannot be circularly demonstrated at all.

> 73a17. And since convertible terms occur rarely in actual demonstrations, it is clearly frivolous and impossible to say that demonstration is reciprocal and that therefore everything can be demonstrated.

> ***Now, demonstration must be based***. After excluding one false basis by showing that not all science depends on demonstration, the Philosopher now excludes another by showing that it is not possible to demonstrate circularly.

To understand this it should be noted that a demonstration is circular when the conclusion and one of the premises (in converted form) of a syllogism are used to prove the other premise. For example, we might form the following syllogism: Every rational mortal animal is risible; Every man is a rational mortal animal: Therefore, every man is risible. Now, if the conclusion were to be used as one principle and the minor in converted form as the other, we would get: Every man is risible; Every rational mortal animal is a man: Therefore, every rational mortal animal is risible—which was the major of the first syllogism.  

Accordingly, he presents three arguments to show that it is not possible to demonstrate circularly.  

The first of these (72b25) is this: In a circular syllogism the same thing is at once a conclusion and a principle. But a principle of a demonstration is prior to and better known than the conclusion, as has been shown above. Therefore, it follows that a same thing is both prior to and subsequent to one same thing, and also more known and less known. But this is impossible. Therefore, it is impossible to demonstrate circularly.  

But someone might say that a same thing can be both prior and subsequent, although not in the same way. For example, this might be prior in reference ***to us***, but that prior ***absolutely***. Thus singulars are prior in reference to us and subsequent absolutely: and conversely for universals. Again, ***induction makes something known*** in one way and demonstration ***in another way***. For demonstration proceeds from things that are prior ***absolutely***, but induction from things that are prior ***in reference to us***. Now, ***if*** a circular demonstration were ***so*** constructed that something is first concluded from things that are absolutely prior, and then from things that are prior in reference to us, it would follow that our doctrine on scientific knowing was not ***well established***. For we stated that to know scientifically is to know the cause of a thing. From this it followed that a demonstration which causes scientific knowledge must proceed from the ***absolutely*** prior. But if demonstration were at one time to proceed from the absolutely prior and at another time from things which are prior in reference to us, we would be forced to admit that scientific knowing is not confined to knowing the cause of a thing, ***but that there is another***, namely, that form of knowing which proceeds from what is later. Therefore, one must either admit both or admit that the second form, namely, ***the demonstration which proceeds from what is better known to us*** is ***not*** a demonstration ***in the absolute sense***.  

The aforesaid also reveals why a dialectical syllogism can be circular. For it proceeds from things which are probable. But things are said to be probable if they are better known to the wise or to a great number of persons. Consequently, a dialectical syllogism proceeds from things that are better known to us. However, it happens that a same thing is better known to some and less known to others. Consequently, there is nothing to hinder a dialectical syllogism from being circular. But a demonstration is formed from things that are absolutely prior. Therefore, as we have already stated, there cannot be circular demonstration.  

Then he sets forth the second argument, at: ***the advocates of circular demonstration*** (72b33), and it is this: If there were circular demonstration, it would follow that a same thing is demonstrated by the same thing, as if I were to say: "If it is this, it is this." In this way ***it is easy*** for anyone ***to demonstrate everything***, for anyone, wise or ignorant, will be able to do this. Accordingly, science is not acquired through demonstration. But this is against the definition of demonstration. Therefore, there cannot be circular demonstration.  

He proves the truth of the first consequence in the following way. ***It is obvious***, first of all, that with a circular demonstration the same thing is proved by a same thing, as has been stated above, that is, if only three terms are employed; although it makes ***no difference*** whether the reflexion be made ***with fewer terms or more***. (By *reflexion* he means the process whereby one goes from principle to conclusion in a demonstration, and then from conclusion to principle). In such a reflexion it makes no difference, so far as the force of the argument is concerned, whether it involves several or fewer terms or even two. For an argument has the same force if one proceeds thus: “If it is A, it is B, and if it is B, it is C, and if it is C, it is D,” and then by reflecting continues, “If it is D, it is C, and if it is C, it is B, and if it is B, it is A”; or if he proceeds by reflecting at the very start, saying: “If it is A, it is B, and if it is B, it is A.” (Although he spoke above of three terms, he restricted himself to two terms in this example, because in the deduction he is about to make he will use a third term, which is the same as the first).  

Then, at: ***if A is, B must be*** (72b38), he gives the form of the argument in three terms, namely: “If it is A, it is B, and if it is B, it is C; therefore, if it is A, it is of necessity C.”  

Then, at: ***since then, by the circular proof*** (73a1), he shows by the aforesaid form of arguing that in a circular demonstration a same thing is proved by a same thing, using only two terms. For it consists in saying, “If it is A, it is B,” and then reflecting, “If it is B, it is A”—which is a circular demonstration. Now, according to the above given form it follows from these two, that “if it is A, it is A.” That it does follow is obvious: for just as in the first deduction which involved three terms’ C followed from B, so in the reflex deduction of two terms, A followed from B. Let us suppose, then, that the A of the second deduction, that is, the reflex, signifies the same thing that C signified in the first, that is, in the direct deduction which was composed of three terms. Therefore, to state in the second deduction that “if it is B it is A” is to state the same thing as was stated in the first deduction, namely, that “if it is B, it is C.” But when it was stated in the first deduction that “if it is B, it is C,” it followed that “if it is A, it is C.” Therefore, in the circular deduction it follows that “if it is A, it is A,” since C is assumed to be the same as A. In this way, it will be ***easy to demonstrate all things***, as has been said.  

Then he presents the third argument, at: ***moreover, even such circular demonstration*** (73a6), which is this: Those who suppose that everything can be known through demonstration on the ground that demonstration is circular, must grant that anything can be demonstrated by a circular demonstration and, as a consequence, grant that in a circular demonstration each of the premises can be concluded from the conclusion. However, the only cases in which this can be done are those in which mutual conversion is possible, that is, in things that are convertible, ***as properties***. But not all things are so related. Therefore, it is ***ridiculous to say*** that everything can be demonstrated on the ground that there are such things as circular demonstrations.  

Now the reason is obvious why in a circular demonstration all the propositions must be convertible. For ***it has been shown*** in the book of *Prior Analytics* that ***if one thing is laid down***, ***another*** does not follow of necessity, ***whether the thing*** laid down ***be one term or one proposition***. For every syllogism must start with three terms and ***two propositions as a minimum***.  

Therefore, in a circular demonstration three terms which are convertible must be taken, namely, A, B, C, such that A is in every B and in every C, ***and these***, namely, B and C, must inhere ***in each other***, so that every B is C and every C is B, and also inhere in A so that every A is B and every A is C. And so, the terms being thus related, it is possible, ***when using the first figure, to derive any one from any two*** circularly, that is, the conclusion from two premises and each premise from the conclusion and the remaining premise, ***as we pointed out*** in the *Prior Analytics*, where we treated the syllogism formally.  

The way it is done is this: take the three convertible terms, “risible,” “rational mortal animal” and “man,” and form the syllogism: "Every rational mortal animal is risible; Every man is a rational mortal animal: Therefore, every man is risible". Then from the conclusion it is possible to conclude both the major and the minor; the major thus: "Every man is risible; But every rational mortal animal is a man: Therefore, every rational mortal animal is risible*"* and the minor thus: "Every risible is a rational mortal animal; But every man is risible: Therefore, every man is a rational mortal animal*"*.  

However, ***it has also been proved*** in the *Prior Analytics* that ***in figures other than the first***, namely, in the second and third, ***one cannot form*** a circular ***syllogism***, that is, one through which each of the premises can be syllogized from the conclusion; ***or*** if one is formed, it is done ***not by using the premises already used*** but by using propositions other than those which appear in the first syllogism.  

That this is so is obvious. For the second figure always yields a negative conclusion. Consequently, one premise must be affirmative and the other negative. However, it is true that if both are negative, nothing can be concluded; and if both are affirmative, a negative conclusion cannot follow. Therefore, it is not possible to use the negative conclusion and the negative premise to obtain the affirmative premise as a conclusion. Hence, if this affirmative is to be proved, it must be proved through propositions other than the ones originally used.  

Again, in the third figure the only conclusion ever obtained is particular. However, at least one premise must be universal; furthermore, if either premise is particular, a universal cannot be concluded. Hence it cannot occur that in the third figure each of the premises can be syllogized from the conclusion and the remaining premise.  

For the same reasons it is obvious that such a circular syllogism (through which each premise could be concluded) cannot be formed in the first figure except in the first mode, which is the only one that concludes to a universal affirmative. Furthermore, even in this mode the only case in which a circular syllogism could be formed such that each of the premises could be concluded, is when the three terms employed are equal, that is, convertible.  

The proof is this: The premise must be concluded from the conclusion and the converse of the other premise, as has been stated. But such a conversion of each premise is impossible (for each is universal), except when the terms happen to be equal.
