# Lecture 11 — How a cause which is not simultaneous with its effect may be taken as a middle in demonstration

b1. We have also to inquire what it is that holds events together so that the coming-to-be now occurring in actual things follows upon a past event. It is evident, we may suggest, that a past event and a present process cannot be ‘contiguous’, for not even two past events can be ‘contiguous’. For past events are limits and atomic; so just as points are not ‘contiguous’ neither are past events, since both are indivisible. For the same reason a past event and a present process cannot be ‘contiguous’, for the process is divisible, the event indivisible. Thus the relation of present process to past event is analogous to that of line to point, since a process contains an infinity of past events. These questions, however, must receive a more explicit treatment in our general theory of change.  

> b12. The following must suffice as an account of the manner in which the middle would be identical with the cause on the supposition that coming-to-be is a series of consecutive events: for in the terms of such a series too the middle and major terms must form an immediate premise; e.g., we argue that, since C has occurred, therefore A occurred: and C’s occurrence was posterior, A’s prior; but C is the source of the inference because it is nearer to the present moment, and the starting-point of time is the present. We next argue that, since D has occurred, therefore C occurred. Then we conclude that, since D has occurred, therefore A must have occurred; and the cause is C, for since D has occurred C must have occurred, and since C has occurred A must previously have occurred. If we get our middle term in this way, will the series terminate in an immediate premise,

> b23. for since, as we said, no two events are ‘contiguous’, will a fresh middle term always intervene because there is an infinity of middles? No: though no two events are ‘contiguous’, yet we must start from a premise consisting of a middle and the present event as major.

> b25. The like is true of future events too, since if it is true to say that D will exist, it must be a prior truth to say that A will exist, and the cause of this conclusion is C; for if D will exist, C will exist prior to D, and if C will exist, A will exist prior to it. And here too the same infinite divisibility might be urged, since future events are not ‘contiguous’. But here too an immediate basic premise must be assumed.

> b31. And in the world of fact this is so: if a house has been built, then blocks must have been quarried and shaped. The reason is that a house having been built necessitates a foundation having been laid, and if a foundation has been laid blocks must have been shaped beforehand. Again, if a house will be built, blocks will similarly be shaped beforehand; and proof is through the middle in the same way, for the foundation will exist before the house.

> ***We have also to inquire what it is***. After stating the question whether in things that do not come to be simultaneously the subsequent according to temporal continuity follows the prior, and after interjecting something necessary, namely, that one may not syllogize from what is prior to what is subsequent, the Philosopher now undertakes to settle the question he raised.

Concerning this he does two things.  

First, he shows how coming to be and having come to be are related according to continuity of time.  

Second, he proves his proposal, at: ***the following must suffice*** (96b12; [516]).  

He says therefore first (96b1), that in order to prove the proposal it is necessary to investigate ***what*** it is that joins or forms a continuity between a ***“having come to be”*** and a ***“coming to be***,***”*** ***so that*** one might follow the other without interruption. In regard to this he says first of all that ***it is obvious*** that a “coming to be” ***is not had***, that is, is not consecutive to a “having come to be.”  

(Those things are said to be consecutive which have no member of their genus between them; for example, two soldiers in a line or two clerics in their choir stalls. *Had*, however, adds the notion of contact to that which is consequent, as it is stated in *Physics* V).  

Thus, therefore, he is saying that a “coming to be” cannot be consecutive or contiguous to a “having come to be.” Then he proves this, because ***not*** even a ***“having come to be”*** is contiguous in the sense of consecutive to any other “having come to be”: for two instances of “having come to be” are related in the way that two ***indivisible boundaries*** of time are related, or as two points in a line. Hence just as two points are not consecutive to one another, so neither are two instances of “having come to be”: for the points and the instances of “having come to be” exist as indivisibles, and such things are not consecutive in their continua, as is proved in *Physics* VI. And since two instances of “having come to be” are not consecutive, it is therefore obvious that a “coming to be” and a “having come to be” are not consecutive. ***For*** a “coming to be” is something ***divisible***, just as a “being moved” is; but a ***“having come to be”*** is something ***indivisible***, just as a point is. ***Therefore***, ***as the line is to*** the point, ***so*** the “coming to be” is to the ***“having come to be***.***”*** For there is an infinitude of “having come to be’s,” just as there is potentially an infinitude of points in a line.  

And this is the cause why it is impossible to take two points that are consecutive in a line, namely, because between any two points there is still another point to be taken; likewise, between any two “having come to be’s” there is another to be taken. Hence two “having come to be’s” are not consecutive. Furthermore, because a “having come to be” is the terminus of a “coming to be,” it follows that not even a “coming to be” is consecutive to a “having come to be”; otherwise two “having come to be’s” would be consecutive. Rather a “coming to be” is terminated immediately at a “having come to be,” as a line is terminated at a point. ***This matter is treated at greater length in the analysis of motion***, that is, in *Physics* VI.  

Then (96b12) he shows in the light of the foregoing how the effect can be taken as being immediate or mediate to the cause in cases where they are not simultaneous.  

First, he proves his proposal.  

Second, he elucidates it with examples, at: ***and in the world of fact*** (96b31; [520]).  

Concerning the first he does two things.  

First, he shows his proposal in regard to the past.  

Second, in future things, at: ***the like is true of future events*** (96b25; [519]).  

Concerning the first he does two things.  

First, he shows his proposal.  

Second, he excludes an objection, at: ***for since, as we said*** (96b23; [518]).  

He says, therefore first (96b12) that from what has been established it is possible to gather how a cause which is taken as a middle in demonstration may be consecutive to that which is in the process of becoming or of being generated: because even in these demonstrations which syllogize about things that are in a “coming to be,” it is ***necessary*** to admit ***a middle and a first*** which are ***immediate***, as when we conclude that ***A has come to be*** because ***C has come to be***, so long, namely, as ***C has come to be subsequently*** and ***A previously.***  

For example, if we should say, “He has been cured; therefore he drank the medicine”: for the syllogism would not follow if we began with what is prior, as we have established above; but C is taken as a ***principle***, although it is later in coming to be, ***owing to the fact that it is* *closer to the present now*** than A. But the present now ***is a principle of time*** because according to it the past and future are distinguished; hence it is necessary to take the present *now* as the principle for making known the succession of time. For in the realm of the past, something is more subsequent in becoming, future.  

Therefore, just as C is taken as the principle of syllogizing, since it is more subsequent in coming to be than A and closer to the present *now*, so we may take D as nearer to the present now than C, and conclude that ***if D has come to be, C came to be*** previously: for example, if he performs the tasks of a healthy man, then previous to that he was cured.  

Therefore, we can conclude that if D has come to pass,** *it is necessary*** that ***A*** have previously ***come to pass***; and we take as ***cause*** that which was in the interim, namely, **C. For D having come to be,** it is **necessary** that C previously have come to be; and ***C having come to be, it is necessary*** that **A** have **previously come to be.**  

Therefore, D having come to be, it is necessary that A have previously come to be. For example, if this person now accomplishes the tasks of a healthy man, it follows that previously he had been cured; and if he has been cured, it is necessary that previously he have drunk the medicine.  

Therefore, by always taking a ***middle*** in this way, for example, something else between C and A, as C was taken as middle between D and A, one will come to rest ***somewhere at*** something ***immediate***.  

Then, at: ***for since, as we said*** (96b23) he presents an objection.  

For someone can say that some thing immediate will never be reached, but it will always be necessary to take something between two “having come to be’s” on the ground that in every instance of coming to be there is an infinitude of “having come to be’s,” since one “having come to be” is not consecutive to another, as has been said.  

But he excludes this objection because although there is an infinitude of “having come to be’s” in one case of coming to be, ***nevertheless it is necessary to begin*** at some ***middle***, namely, ***from a now*** as from something first: for it has been established that that which is subsequent is a principle of syllogizing. But in relation to all things that have come to be in the past, the latest is the present *now*; hence it is necessary to take the present *now* as the first and immediate principle. However, any other “having come to be” is taken as a mediate principle.  

Then, at: ***the like is true of future events*** (96b25) he shows the same for future things.  

He says that as the case was in that which has come to be, ***so*** it is ***in that which will*** have come to be: because ***if it is true that D will be***, ***it is necessary*** that it ***previously*** be verified that A exists; and ***the cause of this*** will be taken to be C, which falls as middle between D and A. For ***if D will be***, it is necessary that ***prior*** to it ***C will be***, and ***if C will be***, it is necessary that ***prior*** to it A will be. In this case, ***likewise***, the objection concerning the infinite division of the future into instants, or of motion into moments can be lodged: because, as in the case of past things, so also in future things, the indivisibles are not consecutive.  

Nevertheless here too, something must be taken as ***an immediate principle***, as was done in things which came to be in the past. For although one cannot take two consecutive “having come to be’s” either in the past or in the future, nevertheless something terminal can be the closer it is to the present now; but the converse is true in regard to the taken in both, and this will be taken as the immediate principle.  

Then, at: ***and in the world of fact*** (96b31) he elucidates what he had said with examples.  

He says that the manner of arguing employed above can be considered in regard, to human works. Thus, let us take the “having come to be” of a house as something terminal; from this it is concluded, as something first, that ***it is necessary that the stones*** have previously been ***cut***; and we shall take as middle the laying of the foundation: because ***if the house has been constructed, it is necessary*** that previously **the foundation** has been **laid**; and if the foundation has been laid, it is necessary first that the stones have been cut. And what was taken in regard to the past must also be taken in regard to the future: for example,** *if a house will exist***, it is necessary that first the cutting of the stones will occur, and that this be demonstrated ***through*** some ***middle***, which is the laying of the foundation.
