# Chapter 11 — What punishments are in store for a tyrant

From the above arguments it is evident that stability of power, wealth, honor and fame come to fulfill the desires of kings rather than tyrants, and it is in seeking to acquire these things unduly that princes turn to tyranny. For no one falls away from justice except through a desire for some temporal advantage. The tyrant, moreover, loses the surpassing beatitude which is due as a reward to kings and, which is still more serious, brings upon himself great suffering as a punishment. For if the man who despoils a single man, or casts him into slavery, or kills him, deserves the greatest punishment (death in the judgment of men, and in the judgment of God eternal damnation), how much worse tortures must we consider a tyrant deserves, who on all sides robs everybody, works against the common liberty of all, and kills whom he will at his merest whim? Again, such men rarely repent; but puffed up by the wind of pride, deservedly abandoned by God for their sins, and besmirched by the flattery of men, they can rarely make worthy satisfaction. When will they ever restore all those things which they have received beyond their just due? Yet no one doubts that they are bound to restore those ill-gotten goods. When will they make amends to those whom they have oppressed and unjustly injured in their many ways?  

The malice of their impenitence is increased by the fact that they consider everything licit which they can do unresisted and with impunity. Hence they not only make no effort to repair the evil they have done, but, taking their customary way of acting as their authority, they hand on their boldness in sinning to posterity. Consequently, they are held guilty before God not only for their own sins, but also for the crimes of those to whom they gave the occasion of sin.  

Their sin is made greater also from the dignity of the office they have assumed. Just as an earthly king inflicts a heavier punishment upon his ministers if he finds them traitors to him, so God will punish more severely those whom he made the executors and ministers of his government if they act wickedly, turning God’s judgment into bitterness. Hence, in the Book of Wisdom, the following words are addressed to wicked kings: *Because as servants of his kingdom you did not rule rightly, nor keep the law, nor walk according to the purpose of God, he will come upon you terribly and swiftly, because severe judgment falls on those in high places. For the lowliest man may be pardoned in mercy, but mighty men will be mightily tested* (Wis 6:4–6). And to Nabuchodonosor it is said by Isaiah: *You are brought down to hell, to the depths of the pit. Those who see you will stare at you, and ponder over you* (Isa 14:15–16), as one more deeply buried in punishments.
