# Chapter 3 — That the manner of governing the kingdom is taken from the divine government

Just as the founding of a city or kingdom may suitably be learned from the way in which the world was created, so too the way to govern may be learned from the divine government of the world.  

Before going into that, however, we should consider that ‘to govern’ is to lead the thing governed in a suitable way towards its proper end. Thus a ship is said to be governed when, through the skill of the pilot, it is brought unharmed and by a direct route to harbor. Consequently, if a thing be directed to an end outside itself (as a ship to the harbor), it is the governor’s duty, not only to preserve the thing unharmed, but further to guide it towards this end. If, on the contrary, there be a thing whose end is not outside itself, then the governor’s endeavors will merely tend to preserve the thing undamaged in its proper perfection. Nothing of this kind is to be found in reality, except God himself, who is the end of all. However, as concerns the thing which is directed to an end outside itself, care is exercised by different providers in different ways. One might have the task of preserving a thing in its being, another of bringing it to a further perfection. Such is clearly the case in the example of the ship: the first meaning of the word ‘governor’ is a pilot. It is the carpenter’s business to repair anything which might be broken, while the pilot bears the responsibility of bringing the ship to port. It is the same with man. The doctor sees to it that a man’s life is preserved, the tradesman supplies the necessities of life, the teacher takes care that man may learn the truth: but the founder sees that he lives according to reason.  

Now if man were not ordained to another end outside himself, the above-mentioned cares would be sufficient for him. But as long as man’s mortal life endures, there is an extrinsic good for him: namely, final beatitude which is looked for after death in the enjoyment of God. As the Apostle says: *While we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord* (2 Cor 5:6). Consequently, the Christian man, for whom that beatitude has been purchased by the blood of Christ, and who, in order to attain it, has received the earnest of the Holy Spirit, needs another and spiritual care to direct him to the harbor of eternal salvation, and this care is provided for the faithful by the ministers of the Church of Christ.  

Now the same judgment is to be formed about the end of society as a whole as about the end of one man. If, therefore, the ultimate end of man were some good that existed in himself, then the ultimate end of the multitude to be governed would likewise be for the multitude to acquire such good, and persevere in its possession. If such an ultimate end either of an individual man or a multitude were corporeal life and health of body, it would be the physician’s job to govern. If that ultimate end were an abundance of wealth, then the economist would be the king of the multitude. If the good of the knowledge of truth were of such a kind that the multitude might attain to it, the king would have to be a teacher.  

It is, however, clear that the end of a multitude gathered together is to live virtuously. For men form a group for the purpose of living well together, a thing which the individual man living alone could not attain. Now, the good life is a virtuous life; therefore, virtuous life is the end for which men gather together. The evidence for this lies in the fact that only those who render mutual assistance to one another in living well form a genuine part of an assembled multitude. If men assembled merely to live, then animals and slaves would form a part of the civil community. Or, if men assembled only to accrue wealth, then all those who traded together would belong to one city. Yet we see that only such are regarded as forming one multitude as are directed to live well by the same laws and the same government.  

Yet through virtuous living man is further ordained to a higher end, which consists in the enjoyment of God, as we have said above. Consequently, since society must have the same end as the individual man, it is not the ultimate end of an assembled multitude to live virtuously, but through virtuous living to attain to the possession of God.  

If this end could be attained by the power of human nature, then the duty of a king would have to include the direction of men to it. We are supposing, of course, that he is called king to whom the supreme power of governing in human affairs is entrusted. Now, the higher the end to which a government is ordained, the loftier that government is. Indeed, we always find that the one to whom it pertains to achieve the final end commands those who execute the things that are ordained to that end. For example, the captain, whose business it is to regulate navigation, tells the shipbuilder what kind of ship he must construct to be suitable for navigation; and the ruler of a city, who makes use of arms, tells the blacksmith what kind of arms to make. But because a man does not attain his end, which is the possession of God, by human power but by divine, according to the words of the Apostle: *By the grace of God, life everlasting* (Rom 6:23)—therefore, the task of leading him to that last end does not pertain to human but to divine government.  

Consequently, government of this kind pertains to that king who is not only a man, but also God, namely, our Lord Jesus Christ, who by making men sons of God brought them to the glory of Heaven. This, then, is the government which has been delivered to him and which *shall not be destroyed* (Dan 7:14), on account of which Sacred Scripture calls him not only Priest, but King. As Jeremiah says: *He shall reign as king and deal wisely* (Jer 23:5). Hence a royal priesthood is derived from him, and what is more, all those who believe in Christ, in so far as they are his members, are called kings and priests.  

Thus, so that spiritual things might be distinguished from earthly things, the ministry of this kingdom has been entrusted not to earthly kings but to priests, and most of all to the chief priest, the successor of St. Peter, the Vicar of Christ, the Roman Pontiff. To him all the kings of the Christian people are to be subject as to our Lord Jesus Christ himself. For those to whom pertains the care of intermediate ends should be subject to him to whom pertains the care of the ultimate end, and be directed by his rule.  

Because the priesthood of the gentiles and the whole worship of their gods existed merely for the acquisition of temporal goods (which were all ordained to the common good of the multitude, whose care devolved upon the king), the priests of the gentiles were very properly subject to the kings. Similarly, since in the Old Law earthly goods were promised to the religious people (not indeed by demons but by the true God), the priests of the Old Law, we read, were also subject to the kings. But in the New Law there is a higher priesthood by which men are guided to heavenly goods. Consequently, in the law of Christ, kings must be subject to priests.  

It was therefore also a marvelous disposition of divine providence that, in the city of Rome, which God had foreseen would be the principal seat of the Christian priesthood, the custom was gradually established that the rulers of the city should be subject to the priests, for as Valerius Maximus relates: *Our city has always considered that everything should yield precedence to religion, even those things in which it aimed to display the splendor of supreme majesty. We therefore unhesitatingly made the imperial dignity minister to religion, considering that the empire would thus hold control of human affairs if, faithfully and constantly, it were submissive to the divine power*. *(*De Bello Gallico* VI, 13, 5.)* And because it was to come to pass that the religion of the Christian priesthood should especially thrive in France, God also provided that among the Gauls their tribal priests, called druids, should lay down the law of all Gaul, as Julius Caesar relates in the book which he wrote *On the Gallic War*.
