# Section 1 — COMMENTARY ON THE SENTENCES

Distinction 16: Why he suffered and died; the Transfiguration

Distinction 17: Christ's human and divine wills

Distinction 18: Christ's merit

Distinction 19: What Christ's suffering freed us from; Mediator

Distinction 20: Satisfaction; other ways of redemption?

Distinction 21: The death and resurrection of Christ

Distinction 22: Death, descent to underworld, ascension

Distinction 23: Virtues in general, faith

Distinction 24: Objects and merit of faith

Distinction 25: Articles of Creed; explicit, implicit faith

Distinction 26: Hope

Distinction 27: Charity

Distinction 28: Whom we must love

Distinction 29: Order and grades of love

Distinction 30: Love of enemies

Distinction 31: Loss of charity; the book of life; charity in next life

Distinction 32: God's love

Distinction 33: Moral virtues in general; cardinal and adjunct virtues

Distinction 34: Gifts of Holy Spirit

Distinction 35: Active and contemplative life

Distinction 36: The connection of virtues

Distinction 37: The ten commandments

Distinction 38: Kinds of lying

Distinction 39: Perjury

Distinction 40: Old and New Law compared

"Whether the Union was Brought about in the Nature?"

1. It seems that the union was brought about in the nature. For what consists of two natures seems to have one nature in the middle between them, as a mixed thing which consists of the four elements. But Christ consists of two natures according to Augustine (Enchir. 35) who says, that from each substance, namely divine and human, there is one Son of God and of man. Therefore, he seems to have one nature composed from both.

2. Further, nature, in the sense we are speaking of here, is the specific difference informing each and every thing, as Boethius says in the book *Concerning the Two Natures*. But the Philosopher says (Metaphysics 8, 10) that one added difference always changes the species, as in numbers any added unity makes a new species of number. Therefore, human nature added to the divine nature makes a new nature according to species.

3. If it is said that one nature cannot be constituted from two because it is necessary that each nature be preserved in the Incarnation, then one may reply as follows. A soul and body constitute a human nature. Yet, each, namely soul and body, remains unchanged in its own nature. Therefore a third nature can be constituted from two natures, while each of the two is preserved.

4. A property follows the nature of that whose property it is. But, the properties of the divine nature are attributed to that man. For, it is said that that man created the stars and conversely, it is said that the Son of God suffered. Therefore, it seems that something of the divine nature is in the human nature, and that something of the human is in the divine; and so there seems to be a certain joining of natures in one nature.

5. Further, when any two things are joined, one of which goes beyond the other, the one which is exceeded changes into the nature of the one which exceeds, just as if a drop of wine were thrown into a thousand vessels of water. But the divine nature infinitely exceeds the human nature. Therefore, [when] the human nature is joined to the divine, the whole is changed into the divine.

6. Besides, this [natural union] seems to be the case because the flesh of Christ is called deified by the saints as Damascene reports (5,11).

To the contrary, filiation requires a similarity in nature. But Christ is called the Son of God the Father and of the Virgin mother. Therefore, he is similar in nature to both. But the Virgin and God the Father do not share in any nature. Therefore, it is necessary to posit a Christ of two natures.

Further, we arrive at an understanding of a nature through natural properties. But in Christ we find the properties of two natures, that of human nature and that of divine nature. Therefore, it is necessary to posit a Christ of two natures.

Solution: I answer that for a clear understanding of this question it is necessary to know what the name "nature" signifies. But, "nature" takes its name from being born (nascendo) and this is properly called the generation of living things producing things similar in species from similar things. Hence, according to the first institution [of the word] nature signifies the generation itself of living things, namely, nativity. Further, the name "nature" was transferred to signifying the active principle of that generation: because the agent powers are accustomed to be named from [their] acts. From this the name "nature" came to be used to signify the active principle of any natural motion: and further to signifying even the material principle of any generation: and from that to also signifying the formal principle, which is the terminus of generation. But because generation is not terminated merely at form, but at a composite substance, [the word nature] was thus transferred to signifying any substance, according to what the Philosopher says in 5 Metaphys. (text 5), and also for signifying any being (ens) as well, as Boethius says.

However, "substance", besides the significations by which form or matter are called substance, is used in two ways according to the Philosopher. In one way, substance is used of the subject itself which is called a "this something" and is not predicated of another, e.g. this man, insofar as a substance is signified by the name hypostasis; and according to this signification a substance is called a nature insofar as nature is what can act and be acted upon, as Boethius says in the aforementioned book. In another way substance is used of "that which it was to be", that is the quiddity and essence which the definition of anything signifies. This is the sense of substance signified by the name " *ousia* "; and so a substance is also called a nature, in accordance with what Boethius says, that "nature is the specific difference informing each and every thing"; since the ultimate difference is what completes the definition.

Leaving aside all other significations of nature, we ask, according to this signification alone, whether there is one nature in Christ or many. But, if there were only one [nature], then [there would be] either one of these [natures] alone or a nature composed from both. If one of these alone, this would come about in two ways. In one way, with no joining of one nature to another intervening; and thus if there were only the divine nature, nothing new would happen in this, that the Word was made flesh, and the incarnation is nothing. But, if it were only the human nature, Christ would not differ from other men, and the incarnation perishes. In the second way, one of the natures passes over into the other; which cannot be: since those things which do not share in matter are not able to pass over into one another. But, the divine nature is entirely immaterial, still less does it share a human nature in matter. Further, if the divine nature passed over into the human nature, the simplicity and immutability of the divine nature would be destroyed; but, if the human were changed into the divine, the truth of the passion and of everything which Christ did corporeally would be destroyed.

However, if one nature were composed from two, this could be in two ways. In one way, some third nature would be composed from two natures which do not remain, as a mixed thing is composed from the four elements; and according to this a passible and material divine nature would be posited, because there is no mixture except of those things which share in matter, and which they are fitted to act upon one another and to be acted upon; and the faith confessing Christ to be true God and true man would be destroyed. In another way, something is composed from two natures which remain; and this in two ways. In one way according to commensuration, either of succession or of contiguity; and according to this a corporeal divine nature would be posited: because succession and contact belong to bodily things. In another way, according to formation, as one thing comes out of a body and a soul, and this also cannot be, because through that way one thing does not come to be from two acts or two potencies, but from act and potency, according to the Philosopher, (De Anima, 2,2): but, the divine nature and the human nature are each a being in act. Moreover, the divine nature does not have any potentiality, nor can it be an act joining into the composition of another, since it is the first infinite being subsisting through itself. Therefore, it is obvious that in whatever way one nature is posited in Christ an error follows. Thus, Eutyches, who posited this, was condemned as a heretic.

Resp. 1: Something consists of two natures, yet it is not from two natures as a mixed thing is from elements: because in such things it is necessary that there be a middle nature constituted from two which do not remain. But, Christ consists of two natures in such a way that he subsists in two remaining natures. For he is of human and divine nature. Therefore, the argument does not follow.

Resp. 2: As Avicenna says the difference names the whole nature of the species; otherwise, it would not be predicated of the species; but it does not name from the whole, but from the part, namely, from the formal principle. For example, something is called rational as having reason. But conversely, the genus names the whole from the material principle. Hence the difference is not added to a difference through this, that the nature is added to a nature, but through this, that a further formal principle is added, as the intellective principle is added above the sensitive principle. But, there is not such an addition in Christ; for one nature is not added to another as if it were the formal principle of that thing, as was said.

Resp. 3: The soul and the body, insofar as they are parts of a man, are not, properly speaking, two natures, as we are speaking of nature in the matter under discussion; but each is part of a nature, the one as a form, the other as matter; hence there is no objection.

Resp. 4: Properties of the human nature are never said about the divine nature, nor conversely, except according to a certain participation. But, [the properties of] both [natures] are said of the thing which has a human or a divine [nature], which is signified both by the name "God" and by the name "man", for it is the same thing which has both natures.

Resp. 5: That argument holds good in those things which share in matter, those which both act upon one another and are acted upon, and thus it is not to the point.

Resp. 6: The flesh is called deified not because it was made the Godhead, but because it was made the flesh of God, and also because it shares more abundantly the gifts of the Godhead from the fact that it was united to the Godhead, and because it is like an instrument through which the divine power accomplishes our salvation: for by touching the leper in the flesh he healed by the power of the Godhead, and by dying in the flesh he conquered death through the power of the Godhead. Now, the power of an agent is in some way in the instrument, by which means the agent does something.

"Whether the union was brought about in the person, and if Christ is one person?"

1. It would seem that there is not only one person in Christ and, thus, the union was not brought about in the person. For no nature is found without those things which result from that nature per se. But, personality results from the human nature per se, and likewise as regards the divine nature. Therefore, each nature has its own personality.

2. Further, the human nature is of a greater dignity in Christ than in Peter. But, personality pertains to dignity. Hence, a person is not found in inferior substances. Therefore, just as the humanity of Peter has its own personality, so too does the humanity of Christ.

3. Further, nothing seems to be in a person except a nature and the things distinguishing the suppositum of the nature from other supposita. But, the natures in Christ are different, and [each nature] is distinctively diverse, because he is distinguished from the Father and the Holy Spirit through eternal relations. Now, he is distinguished from other men by the division of matter and of accidents. Therefore, there is a two-fold personality there.

4. Further, there is a greater agreement in a person than in a genus or species, because agreement in a person is in something which is one thing in reality, but agreement in a genus or species is one thing according to reason. But, on account of the great distance [between] the human and divine natures there cannot be an agreement of them in a genus or species. Much less, then, can they agree in one person.

5. Further, the Philosopher says in 5 *Metaphys.* (l. 16), that diversity in a species follows on diversity in the genus and on this follows diversity according to number. But diversity according to species is found in Christ: because there are different natures [in him], according to that sense by which a nature is called the specific difference informing each and every thing. Therefore, a difference is also found according to number. But, where the person is the same, the thing is the same according to number. Therefore, there is not only one person in Christ.

6. Further, there is no less an affinity between nature and person than between form and matter. But there is a difference of matter according to the difference of forms, because one's own act happens in one's own matter. Therefore, according to the diversity of natures there is also a diversity of persons; and thus the same conclusion as in the first objection follows.

To the contrary, in those things which differ according to person and nature, what is said of one, is not said of the other. But things which are God's are attributed to man in the Scriptures: Ps. 86:5, Man was born in her, and the Most High established her; and those things which are man's are attributed to God; 1 Cor., 2:8: "They never would have crucified the Lord of glory". Therefore, God and man belong to [the same] person.

Further, what is attributed to the Son and not to the Father belongs to him according to that in which he is distinguished from the Father. But passively receiving the union belongs to the Son and not to the Father. Therefore, it belongs to him according to the thing which distinguishes him from the Father. But, this [distinguishing feature] is in the person, therefore, the union was brought about in the person.

Further, for the redemption of mankind, it is necessary that there be one agent who is God, capable [of making] satisfaction, and who is a man, owing satisfaction, as is obvious from the things said in 1 d., q. 1, a. 2. But two persons cannot be one agent in any way. Therefore, if there are two persons, satisfaction would not yet be accomplished; and thus we are still in slavery to sin, which is contrary to the sacred Scripture of the New Testament.

I answer that, Nestorius, who posited two persons in Christ, was deceived from this, as Boethius says, because he believed that person and nature are the same thing; hence, he believed that since there are two natures in Christ, there are two persons. And the error of Eutyches, who, since he heard that there was one person in Christ, judged that there was one nature, proceeded from the same source. And the error of Arius and Sabellius, against the Trinity, also proceeded from the same source. Therefore, it is necessary to know how person and nature differ in reality, and in which ways they differ only according to our idea (ratio) of them.

For nature, as we speak here, is the quiddity of a thing which its definition signifies; but, a person is that something which subsists in that nature. Now in simple things, which lack matter, as Avicenna says, the simple thing is its own quiddity. But the quiddity of a composite thing is not the composite: for humanity is not a man. The reason for this is that only the essential principles of a man, according to which he is a man, are contained in the signification of humanity, whether of the quiddity, or of the nature, but not those things which pertain to the determination of matter, through which a nature is individuated, [for] these are only contained in the signification of Socrates because through them Socrates is a "this", and is distinguished from other things. And thus, because humanity does not include in its own signification the whole that is in a thing subsisting in a nature, for it is as it were a part, [hence,] it is not predicated, and since nothing subsists unless it is a composite, and a part belongs to its whole, so, the soul does not subsist, but Socrates subsists, and he has humanity [i.e. he is the whole to which the parts belong].

Now, "man" signifies both the individual and the essential principles, but in diverse ways, because it signifies the essential principles determinately, but the individual ones indeterminately [as] these or those [i.e. the principles]. And thus, man, since it is a whole, can be predicated of Socrates, and he is said to have humanity; but, because an undetermined being is incomplete, as if [it were] a being in potency, thus man does not subsist, but this man, to whom the character of a person belongs. Therefore, it is the character of a person to be a distinct subsisting thing, embracing all things which are in reality. But, nature only includes the essential principles. But in simple things nature and person do not differ in reality; because nature [in these things] is not received in some matter which individuates it, but it [i.e. the nature] is subsisting through itself. Yet, insofar as the essential principles of a thing are considered, we use the term nature there; but, insofar as something subsisting is found there, we use the term person. Therefore, it is evident from the fact that the character of a person includes all things that exist in reality, if something is outside of that which person includes, this is not a united thing, unless perhaps according to a similarity in the genus or in species or in an accident. And thus, Boethius says, if there is not one person in Christ no union of the divinity and the humanity took place, except according to some similitude of grace; which even Nestorius posited. And this is not new nor unique to Christ; neither could the redemption take place this way, nor would he be true God, but only through participation, just as the other saints. Hence it must be conceded simply that there is one person in Christ.

Resp. 1: The human nature in Christ is not without personality, but it is in the one person of the Word with the divine nature.

Resp. 2: Christ's human nature is most noble from the fact that it is in the divine person.

Resp. 3: The character of a person includes all the essentials and the individuating properties of the conjoined things at the same time. Hence, it does not follow that if there were two natures and diverse properties, there would be two persons. For if the natures were posited separately with their own properties, each would be a totality, which requires the character of a person, but there is only one totality when they are joined; and thus there is one person.

Resp. 4: Those things which differ in genus or species differ in the number of the essences or natures. But it is not necessary that they differ in the number of the supposita or subjects: because those things which are considered to be of different genera or species according to themselves can be gathered together into one suppositum or subject; just as flesh and bone are for constituting a body, and whiteness and length are in the same subject, and likewise, although the divine and human natures differ more than a genus or species do, yet they can be united into one person.

Resp. 5: As Boethius says, (book 3 *On Porphyr.* *chapter concerning species*), the species is the entire being of individual things, and so too is the genus in some way, as Avicenna says, insofar as it indistinctly signifies a whole. And because the human nature does not embrace the whole being of Christ, thus, it does not posses the nature of a species in Christ; and thus it does not follow that there are diverse species in Christ. One can saythat this [teaching] of the Philosopher must be understood [to refer to] the case when natures of different genera are not joined. For an accident and a subject (although they are in a different genus) do not make a difference of number because they are joined.

Resp. 6: Form unites to matter by informing it; and thus it is necessary that different material things be disposed to different forms. But, the charachter of a person needs only the sort of unity which can come about between very different things. Thus, it is not necessary that different natures have different persons.

Whether Christ is two in the neuter.

Obj. 1:It seems that Christ is two in the neuter. For Isidore says in the book on the Trinity(1): The Mediator of God and men, the man Jesus Christ, although he is other than the Father, and other than the Virgin, yet he is not other (alius). But, wherever there is one thing and another, there are two things. Therefore, Christ is two.

Obj. 2:Further, Christ is one thing by an uncreated unity and he is one thing by a created unity. But a created unity is not an uncreated unity. Therefore Christ is two.

Obj. 3:Further, just as there are three persons in one essence in the Trinity; so too there are two natures in one person in Christ. But on account of the unity of nature, the Father and the Son are called one thing (unum), although [they are] not [called] one (unus). Therefore on account of the personal unity Christ ought to be called one, and also not one thing, but two things because of the duality of natures.

Obj. 4:Further, Christ insofar as he is God, is something which is the Father; and insofar as he is a man, he is something which is the mother. But the Father is not the mother. Therefore, Christ is something and something; and thus he is two.

Obj. 5:Further, Christ is something passible and something impassible. But a passible thing is not an impassible thing. Therefore Christ is something and something. Therefore, Christ is not one thing.

Obj. 6:Further, according to Damascene (De Fide 3,7), the whole (totus) Christ is everywhere, but not the whole thing (totum). But, he is everywhere inasmuch as he is God. Therefore, Christ is not the whole God. But from the fact that he is God, he is something. Therefore he is something and something; and thus the previous objection follows.

Obj. 7:Further, Christ is not only a man. But "man" predicates some one thing of him. Therefore, Christ is not only something one, therefore he is two.

To the Contrary, whatever is, is thus, because it is one in number. Therefore, if Christ is not one thing, he is nothing, which is false.

Further, the human nature in Christ is more harmonious with the divine nature than an accident is with a subject. But an accident with a subject does not produce something numbered. Therefore, neither may we call Christ two by reason of the human and divine nature.

Further, those things which are not one thing cannot be predicated of each other. But we predicate God of the man Christ, and conversely. Therefore Christ is one thing.

I answer that the neuter genus is unformed and indistinct; but the masculine is formed and determinate; hence the masculine is not predicated absolutely except of a complete (perfecta) subsisting thing; but the neuter genus is predicated absolutely of either a complete or incomplete subsisting thing. Hence we cannot say that the whiteness or humanity of Peter is someone, but we can say that it is something. Now we can say that Peter is someone, and that he is something. Likewise, we can say of the person in Christ "it is someone" and "it is something", but of the nature we can say that it is something and not that it is someone. Therefore, according to the second opinion, of which we are treating, the "something" which is the assumed nature is not predicated of Christ: because it does not have the character of a man, but of humanity. Therefore, "something" insofar as it is predicated of Christ does not signify merely the nature, but the suppositum of the nature: and since the plural is the singular doubled, thus Christ could not be called some things (aliqua), unless there were two supposits of the natures in him; which the second, and also the third, opinion denies; and thus each opinion says that Christ is one; but the second says that he is one per se; while the third says that he is one accidentally, like a white man. But the first opinion says that the thing assumed does not only have the character of humanity, but also of a man; and yet we cannot call [this] "someone", since it is joined to another thing of higher dignity, but it is called "something", and that "something" is predicated of the person assuming; and thus it follows that Christ is someone, namely the one assuming, and something, namely the thing assumed; and that he is two in the neuter, but not in the masculine.

Reply 1: "Other" is a partitive term; hence it requires something from which it is divided. Now when we say, "Christ is one thing and another thing", since "other" does not predicate the nature alone, but the supposit of the nature (since human nature is not predicated of Christ), it is necessary that there be here something distinct or divided from the supposit of the human nature, which is predicated of Christ. But this cannot be according to the second opinion: because the supposit of the divine nature is not anything other than the supposit of the human nature; nor is the divine nature, which is predicated of Christ, other than its supposit, neither consequently is it other than the supposit of the human nature. Hence according to this opinion Christ is not properly called one thing and another; but we must explain that he is of one nature and of another nature. But the first opinion which distinguishes the supposits of the natures, can say that Christ is one thing and another thing.

Reply 2: Numerical terms, as was said in 1, are related commonly to the person and the nature; hence speaking of personal unity, there is only one in Christ, inasmuch as we say one Christ; but speaking of the natural unity there is a twofold unity. Yet it does not follow that Christ is one thing and one thing; since the one thing which is predicated of Christ, does not refer only to the nature, but to the supposit of the nature, which is not doubled.

Reply 3: The divine nature is predicated of the person in the nominative on account of the identity of the thing; but the two natures which are in Christ are not predicated of him in the nominative: for although the divine nature is predicated of him in the nominative, yet the human nature is not, just as it is not predicated of any other man. But if the three persons really differed from the nature, although it [s.c. nature] would be in number in them, nevertheless on account of this we could not say, that the three persons were one simply; but perhaps that they were one God; just as many men are called one people.

Reply 4: When we say "Christ is something which is the mother", the "something" does not predicate the nature alone, but the supposit of the nature; as is evident from the aforesaid; but a relative term refers to the antecedent supposit, not because of the supposit, but the because of the nature; for the mother does not agree with the Son in a supposit, but in a nature. But the relative term does not refer to the same thing according to the supposit, whenever it refers to the same thing, it is according to the nature of the species; but when we say there is something which is the Father the "something" predicates the divine nature: hence from this it follows that the human nature is not the divine, but not that Christ is two.

Reply 5: When we say Christ is *something* passible, "something" does not predicate the nature, but the supposit of the human nature; since the properties of the nature are predicated denominatively of the supposit, although the nature is not predicated of it, and likewise the properties of the parts. For although Peter is not hair, yet he is curly. But when we say, "Christ is something impassible", the "something" predicates the supposit of the divine nature, which is none other than the supposit of the human nature; or even the divine nature, which is not other than its supposit. Hence it does not follow that there is one thing and another thing here: for the middle [proposition] is false which says that something passible is not something impassible: for the same supposit which is passible according to one nature, and impassible according to the other.

Reply 6: "Whole" [totus] refers to the person, but "a whole thing" [totum] refers to the nature. Now wholes, as it is taken here, are that from which nothing is lacking: and since nothing is lacking from the personality of the Son, which the name Christ signifies, insofar as he is everywhere, since he is an eternal person; thus we say the whole [totus] is everywhere. But something of the nature is lacking to him, insofar as he is not everywhere; but yet that [sense of] "something" is not predicated of Christ. Hence it does not follow that Christ is something and something; but that there is something and something in him.

Reply 7: Terms posited in the predicate are taken formally (Cf. S.T. I, q. 13, a. 12 ): hence we do not concede that Christ is only a man; since every other nature would be excluded from him. But "something" and "one" do not determine any form or nature; but the supposit is determined, insofar as they are predicated of Christ: for they do not determine [anything] except that concerning which they are posited. Hence if we should say: "Christ is only one thing", or "only something", we do not exclude another nature, but another supposit: and thus this is true: "Christ is only some one thing"; and there is a fallacy of the consequent in that reasoning, since the "something one" is wider in extension than "man". Therefore it proceeds negatively from a term of less extension to one of wider extension, with an exclusive expression.

Whether there is not only one being in Christ.

Obj. 1: It seems that there is not only one being in Christ. For every substantial form gives being. But the soul is a substantial form. Therefore it gives being. But it does not give the being of the divine person, since this is eternal. Therefore it gives another being: therefore there is not only one being in Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, there is one being of the Son of God and of the Father. Therefore, if the being of this man and of the Son of God is one thing, then the being of this man and of the Father will be one. But there is no greater union than that which is of things according to one being. Therefore, humanity was united to God the Father.

Obj. 3: Further, in divine persons there is no being except essential being. Therefore if the union of the human nature to the divine took place in the being of the Son of God, it took place in the essence, which is impossible.

Obj. 4: Further, a phrase indicating what it is to be. But "man" is predicated of Christ and of Peter according to the same definition. Therefore, the human being of this man is the same as that of Peter according to the species. But the being of the Son of God is not the same species as the being of Peter. Therefore there is not only one being in Christ.

Obj. 5: Further, Of whatever can produce an [affirmative] answer to the question "Is it?" has its own being. But this question is asked not only of the person, but also of the nature. Therefore being is not only of the person, but of the nature. But there are two natures in Christ. Therefore there is a two-fold being in Christ.

To the Contrary, everything which has being per se, is a subsisting thing. If therefore there is a two-fold being in Christ, there are two subsisting things there; therefore there are two hypostases: which was disproved above.

Further, [regarding] wherever things differ according to being, one of them is not predicated of the other. But God is man and conversely. Therefore, there is one being of God and man.

Further, of one thing there is only one being. But Christ is one thing, as was said. Therefore he has only one being.

I answer that, according to the Philosopher 5 Metaphys. Text 6, being is said in two ways. In one way it signifies the truth of a proposition, insofar as it is a copula; and thus as Averroes says in the same place, a being [ens] is an accidental predicate; and this is not being [esse] in reality, but in the mind, which joins the predicate with the subject, as the Philosopher says in 6 Metaphys. Text 6. Hence the present question does not concern this. In another way we use the term being as it pertains to the nature of a thing, insofar as it falls under the ten categories; and this indeed is being in reality, and is the act of a being resulting from the principles of the thing, just as to light is the act of lighting.

Yet, sometimes being is used for the essence, according as it is a thing, since their principles [s.c. of things] are customarily signified through acts, such as potency or habit. Therefore, speaking of being insofar as it is the act of a being, thus I say, that according to the second opinion it is necessary to posit only one being; but according to the others it is necessary to posit a two-fold being. For a subsisting being [ens], is what has being [esse] as if this is its "that which is" [quod est], although it [s.c. the divine esse] is of a nature or form, as if this is its "that by which it is" [quo est]. Hence, neither the nature of a thing nor its parts are properly said to be [esse], if "to be" [esse] is taken in the aforesaid manner; likewise neither are accidents, but the complete supposit, [i.e.] that which is in virtue of all of these things. Hence, also the Philosopher says in 2 Metaphys., 3, that an accident is more properly *of* a being, than a being. Therefore, the first opinion, which posits two subsistences posits a two-fold substantial being. Likewise the third opinion, since it posits that the parts of the human nature come to the divine person accidentally, posits a two-fold being, one substantial, and the other accidental. But the second opinion, since it posits one subsisting thing, and that humanity does not come to the divine person accidentally, must posit one being. For it is impossible that something one should have a two-fold substantial being, since one [unum] is founded upon a being [ens]: hence if there are several beings [esse], according to which something is called a being simply, it is impossible that it be called one thing. But it is suitable that the being of one subsisting thing be related to many, just as Peter's being is one thing, yet it is related to the diverse principles constituting him: and likewise in its own way, Christ's one being has two relations, one to the human nature, the other to the divine.

Reply 1: Form produces being; not so that that being is of matter or of form, but of a subsisting thing. Therefore when a thing composed from matter and form is subsisting per se, absolute being per se is acquired by that composite from the form. But when it is not subsisting per se, being is not acquired by that composite through the form; but by virtue of the subsisting thing to which it is adjoined, it acquires a relation according to being to this thing which is added to it: just as if we posit that a man is born without a hand, and a hand by itself is separately formed, and later it is miraculously joined to him, it is obvious that the form of a hand will cause the being of a hand which is a subsistent thing per se: but after it is joined to a man, no being is acquired from the hand's form by the hand, since a hand does not have its own being, but a relationship to the and according to his being [esse] is acquired by the man. So too I say that the soul in Christ does not acquire its own being of a human nature: but from the son of God it acquires a relation according to its being to the human nature, yet this relation is not something really in the divine person, but only something according to reason as was said above of the union d. 2, q. 2, a. 2 sub-quest. 3 ad 3.

Reply 2: [The being] of God is different from [the being] of all other things: since in God his essence is subsisting, hence for him being must be according to himself; nay rather he is his own subsisting being: hence essence does not really differ from person: and thus the essential being is also personal being; and yet person and essence differ by reason. Therefore although there is one being, still being can be considered either as just as it is essential, and thus humanity is not united to the divine being, hence it is not united to the Father: or it can be considered just as it is personal.; and in this way it is united to the divine being.

And through this the solution to the third objection is obvious.

Reply 4: The Philosopher here takes being for essence, or quiddity, which the definition signifies.

Reply 5: That objection proceeds from being insofar as it signifies the truth of a proposition: for this can be said not only of those things which are in reality, but of those things which are in the intellect, about which we can form a statement.
