# Chapter 2 — Watering the hills

> You water the hills from your upper rooms, the earth is sated with the fruit of your works. —Psalm 103:13

**Preface**

The King and Lord of the heavens set down this law from all eternity that the gifts of his Providence should come to the lower through intermediaries. Hence Dionysius in the *Celestial Hierarchy* 5 says, ‘It is the most sacred law of the divinity that things in the middle should be led to his most divine light by first things.’

This is found to be a law not only in spiritual things but also in corporeal. Hence Augustine in *On the Trinity* 3.4: ‘Therefore, as the more crass and least are ruled in a given order by more subtle bodies, so all bodies are ruled by the rational spirit of life.’ Therefore, in the psalm the Lord proposed this law observed in the communication of spiritual wisdom in a metaphor of bodily things: ‘Watering the mountains...’ It is plain to the senses that from the highest clouds rain flows forth by which the mountains and rivers are refreshed and send themselves forth so that the satiated earth can bear fruit. Similarly, from the heights of divine wisdom the minds of the learned, represented by the mountains, are watered, by whose ministry the light of divine wisdom reached to the minds of those who listen.

There are then four things to be considered in the chosen text: the height of spiritual doctrine; the dignity of those who teach it; the condition of the listeners; and the order of communicating.

**1**

Its height is expressed by the words, ‘from your upper rooms’. The Gloss has, ‘from your treasure houses on high’. The height of sacred doctrine comes from three things.

First, its origin: for this is the wisdom that is described as being from on high. James 3:15 and Sirach 1:5: ‘The word of God on high is the fountain of wisdom.’

Second, because of the subtlety of its matter, Sirach 24:7: ‘I dwelt in the highest places, and my throne is in a pillar of a cloud.’ There are some heights of divine wisdom to which all come, though imperfectly, because, as Damascene says in *On Orthodox Faith* I.1, ‘knowledge of the existing God is naturally inserted in all’. In this respect, it is said in Job 36:25, ‘All men see him: every one gazes from afar.’ Other things are higher and only the wit of the wise achieves them. Romans 1:19: ‘What is known about God is manifest to them.’ Some are so high that they completely transcend human reason, of which it is said in Job 28:21, ‘It is hidden from the eyes of all the living,’ and Psalm 17:12, ‘He put on darkness as his covering.’ But this has been made known by the Holy Spirit, ‘Now we have received not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit that is from God,’ instructing holy teachers who passed it on in the text of Sacred Scripture; and these are the highest, in which this wisdom is said to dwell.

Third, from the sublimity of the end, for it has the highest end, namely, life eternal. John 10:31: ‘But these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name.’ Colossians 3:1-2, ‘Therefore, if you have risen with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is seated at the right hand of God. Mind the things that are above, not the things of earth.’

**2**

Because of the height of this doctrine, there is required dignity in those who teach it, which is why they are symbolized by mountains when it is said, ‘from your upper rooms’, and this for three reasons.

First, because of the height of mountains. For they are elevated above the earth and neighbours of the sky. Thus the holy teachers by despising earthly things cleave to heavenly things alone. Philippians 3:20: ‘But our citizenship is in heaven from which also we eagerly await a Saviour, Our Lord Jesus Christ.’ Hence of the teacher of teachers, Christ, it is said in Isaiah 2:2, ‘And in the last days the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared on the top of the mountain... and all nations shall flow unto it.’

Second, because of its splendour. For the mountains are illumined by beams. Similarly the sacred teachers of minds first receive the splendour. Like mountains the teachers are illumined by the first beams of divine wisdom. Psalm 75:5: ‘You came shining with light, powerful, from the everlasting hills. The foolish of heart have been despoiled,’ that is, by the teachers who participate in eternity. Philippians 2:15: ‘You shine like stars in the world.’

Third, because of the protection of the mountains, for the land is defended from the enemy by mountains. So too the doctors of the Church must in defence of the faith stand against errors. The sons of Israel do not put their trust in lance or bow, but the mountains defend them. Ezekiel 13.5: ‘You have not gone up to face the enemy, nor have you set up a wall for the house of Israel to stand in battle in the day of the Lord.’

Therefore all the teachers of Sacred Scripture should give high thanks to their eminence of life, that they might be worthy to preach efficaciously, because as Gregory says in *On Pastoral Care*, ‘The preaching of those whose life is despised will also be despised.’ Ecclesiastes 12:11: ‘The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails deeply fastened in, which by the counsels of masters are given from one shepherd.’ For the heart cannot be stimulated or stirred to fear of God unless it is fixed in highness of life.

They should be enlightened, that they might fittingly teach by reading. Ephesians 3:8-9: ‘Yes, to me, the very least of all the saints, there was given this grace, to announce among the Gentiles the good tidings of the unfathomable riches of Christ, and to enlighten all men as to what is the dispensation of the mystery which has been hidden from eternity in God.’

Armed, that they might refute errors in disputation. Luke 21:15: ‘For I myself will give you utterance and wisdom, which all your adversaries will not be able to resist.’

Of these three offices, namely, to preach, to lecture and to dispute, it is said in Titus 1:9, ‘that he may be able both to exhort in sound doctrine and to confute opponents’.

**3**

Third, the condition of those who hear, which are presented in the symbol of earth: ‘the earth is sated’. This is because the earth is lowest. Proverbs 25:3: ‘The heaven above, and the earth beneath.’ Again, it is stable and firm. Ecclesiastes 1:4: ‘One generation passes away, and another generation comes, but the earth stands for ever.’ Again, it is fruitful. Genesis 1:11: ‘Let the earth bring forth the green herb, and such as may seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind.’

Similarly, they should be low as the earth in humility. Proverbs 11:2: ‘Where humility is, there, also is wisdom.’ Again, firm with the sense of rectitude; Ephesians 4:14: ‘That we may be now no longer children, tossed to and fro and carried about by every wind of doctrine.’ And fruitful, as the precepts of wisdom bear fruit in them, Luke 8:15: ‘Having heard the word, hold it fast and bear fruit in patience.’

Therefore humility is required of them with respect to the learning that comes from listening, Sirach 6:34: ‘If you wilt incline your ear, you shall receive instruction: and if you love to hear, you shall be wise.’ Rectitude of the senses with respect to the judgement of what is heard; Job 12.11: ‘Doth not the ear discern words?’ But fruitfulness in discovery, by which from a few things heard, the good listener pronounces many things; Proverbs 9.9: ‘Give an occasion to a wise man, and wisdom shall be added to him.’

**4**

The order of its coming about is touched on here with respect to three things, namely, the order of communicating, the amount, and the quality of the gift received.

First with respect to the order of communicating, because not everything that is contained in divine wisdom can be grasped by the minds of the teachers. Hence he does not say from the highest mountains, but from the upper; Job 26:14: ‘Lo, these things are said in part.’ Similarly, not everything that the teachers grasp is passed on to the hearers; 1 Corinthians 12:4: ‘...and heard secret words that a man may not repeat’. Hence he does not say, passing on to earth the fruits of the mountains, but ‘the earth is sated with the fruit of your works’. This is what Gregory, in the *Morals on Job* 26 says in explaining Job 26:8, ‘He binds up the waters in his clouds, so that they break not out and fall down together’: ‘For the teacher should not preach to the simple as much as he knows, because he himself is unable to know how many divine mysteries there are.’

Second, the order with respect to the mode of having is touched upon, because God has wisdom naturally. Hence his ‘upper rooms’ are what is natural to him; Job 12:13: ‘With him is wisdom and strength; he hath counsel and understanding.’ But teachers share in wisdom abundantly. Hence they are said to be watered from on high. Sirach 24:42: ‘I said I will water my garden of plants, and I will water abundantly the fruits of my meadow.’ But listeners sufficiently participate in it, and the satiety of the earth signifies this; Psalm 16:15: ‘I shall be satisfied by seeing you.’

Third, with respect to the power of communicating, because God communicates wisdom by his own power. Hence by himself he is said to water the mountains. But the teachers do not communicate wisdom except as ministers. Hence the fruits of the mountains are not attributed to them but to the divine works, ‘By the fruit of your works’. 1 Corinthians 3-45: ‘What then is Paul’ and later, ‘His minister in whom you believe’.

But 2 Corinthians 2:16: ‘...who is worthy of this...’ For God requires innocent ministers; Psalm 100:6: ‘He who walks in the perfect way shall serve me.’ Understanding; Proverbs 14:35: ‘A wise servant is acceptable to the king.’ Fervour; Psalm 103:4: ‘You make the winds your messengers, and the blazing fire your ministers.’ Again, obedience; Psalm 102:21: ‘You ministers of his who do his will’.

But although no one by himself, of himself, is sufficient for such a ministry, he can hope to have this sufficiency from God; 2 Corinthians 3:5: ‘Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think anything, as from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from God.’ He must ask it of God; James 1:5: ‘But if any of you is wanting in wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives abundantly to all men, and does not reproach; and it will be given to him.’

Let us pray that Christ will grant it to us. Amen.
