# Chapter 32 — How the sole definition of the Nicene Council is to be understood as the unique and true possession of the faithful.

Doubt also arises from the same letter where Athanasius says that “only the definition of the Fathers of the Council of Nicaea, discerned in the spirit and not in the letter, is the unique and true possession of the orthodox.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote118" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote118); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote118\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Someone might interpret this as implying that the definition of the said Council enjoys greater authority than the letter of the Old Testament, which is absolutely false.

The text, however, must be read in the sense that through the said Council the true meaning of Sacred Scripture is perceived, a meaning which only Catholics possess, although the letter of Sacred Scripture is common to Catholics and heretics and Jews.

PART TWO

**PROLOGUE**

After these explanations, then, we proceed now to show how on the basis of the authorities contained in the aforementioned book the true faith is taught and defended against error. It is to be kept in mind that the Son of God appeared precisely in order to destroy the works of the devil, as stated in 1 John 3:8). Hence, he has exerted and continues to exert his every energy in the opposite direction to destroy the work of Christ. He attempted to do this initially via tyrants who inflicted bodily death on the ministers of Christ: subsequently, however, via heretics through whom he worked the spiritual death of many. Hence, on careful examination the errors of heretics appear tending mainly to diminish the dignity of Christ.

Indeed, Arius diminished the dignity of Christ by destroying that He was the Son of God consubstantial with the Father and by asserting Him to be a creature. Macedonius, by asserting that the Holy Spirit is a creature, took from the Son the honor of spirating a divine person. Mani diminished the dignity of Christ when he claimed that visible things were created by an evil God, thereby denying that all things were created through the Son. So, too, Nestorius destroyed what belonged to Christ, for in making one Person in Christ the son of man and another the Son of God he denied the unity of Christ. So, too, Eutyches, who by asserting that in the incarnation of Christ one nature was formed out of two, namely, the divine and the human, in fact deprived Him of both natures; for what is a composite of two things cannot truly be said to be either. Pelagius also dissolved Christ, for by saying that we do not need grace to attain salvation, he rendered Christ’s coming pointless; for, as stated in John 1:17: Grace and truth come through Jesus Christ. Jovinian lessened the dignity of Christ when he said that married persons were the equal of virgins, since we profess that Christ was born of a Virgin. Vigilantius lessened the dignity of Christ, when in attacking poverty embraced for the love of Christ he spoke against the perfection which Christ observed and taught. Therefore, it is justly remarked in 1 John 4:3: Every spirit that dissolves Jesus is not of God, but is the Antichrist.

So, also, at the present time

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote119" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote119); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote119\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
some

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote120" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote120); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote120\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
are described as dissolving Christ by diminishing His dignity so far as this lies in their power. In saying that the Holy Spirit does not proceed from the Son, they lessen His dignity, since He together with the Father is the Spirator of the Holy Spirit. In denying, moreover, that there is one head of the Church, namely, the holy Roman Church, they clearly dissolve the unity of the Mystical Body; for there cannot be one body if there is not one head, nor one congregation if there is not one ruler. Hence, John 10:16 says: There will be one fold and one shepherd.

In denying that the sacrament of the altar can be consecrated of unleavened bread, they are manifestly in opposition to Christ, who, as the evangelists relate, instituted this sacrament on the first day of the unleavened read, when it was against the law for there to be leavened bread in the houses of the Jews. Their view also seems to diminish the purity of the sacramental body of Christ, to which the Apostle exhorts the faithful in 1 Cor. 5:8, saying: Let us, therefore, celebrated the festival, not with the old leaven, the leaven of malice and evil, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. In denying purgatory they also lessen the power of this sacrament which is offered in the Church both for the living and for the dead; for if purgatory does not exist, it avails the dead nothing; it cannot profit them if they are in hell, where there is no redemption;

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote121" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote121); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote121\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
nor can it do them any good if they are in heaven, where they are in no need of our prayers.

How these errors may be refuted using the authorities already cited, I will briefly demonstrate, dealing first with the procession of the Holy Spirit.

**CHAPTER 1

That the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Son.**

The starting point of any demonstration that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son must be what those in error also cannot deny, namely, that the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Son, since this is expressly proved on the authority of Holy Scripture.

Galatians, 4:6: Because you are sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father. And Romans 4 (rather 8:9): Anyone who does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. Acts 16: 7: When they had come opposite Mysia, they attempted to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them. And 1 Cor. 2:16: We have the mind of Christ. And from what the Apostle says previously it is clear that this must be understood of the Holy Spirit.

The Holy Spirit is also called the Spirit of truth, as in John 15:26: When the Paraclete comes, whom I shall send you from the Father, the Spirit of truth. He is also called the Spirit of life, as in Romans 8:2: The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus. Hence, when the Son says of himself: I am the Way, the Truth and the Life (John 14: 6), the Greek doctors conclude

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote122" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote122); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote122\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
that this is the Spirit of Christ. They argue

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote123" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote123); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote123\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
similarly from the words of the Psalm (32:6): By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and all their host by the breath of his mouth. For the Son is also called mouth of the Father

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote124" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote124); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote124\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
as well as Word.

But lest anyone claim that the Spirit who proceeds from the Father is other than the Spirit of the Son, the Scriptures show that the same Holy Spirit is of the Father and of the Son. For in John 15:11 he is simultaneously called Spirit of truth and Spirit who proceeds from the Father. And Romans 8:9 after stating: If the Spirit of God who dwells in you, immediately adds: If anyone has not the Spirit of Christ, to indicate that the Spirit of Father and Son is one and the same. Hence Basil, after citing these words of the Apostle, refutes Eunomius thus: “Behold he, namely, the Apostle, saw in Father and Son the one Spirit both of Father and of Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote125" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote125); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote125\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Theodoret, explaining the same passage in his commentary on the letter to the Romans, says: “The Holy Spirit is common to Father and Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote126" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote126); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote126\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

The question, then, to be pondered is how the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Son or the Spirit of Christ. One might say that he is the Spirit of Christ in so far as he dwelt fully in the man Christ, ad in Luke 4:1: Jesus full of the Holy Spirit returned from Jordan, or in John 1:16: Of whose fullness we have all received. This solution, however, cannot be defended when taken as the only reason why the Spirit is called the Spirit of Christ.

For it is shown by the Greek doctors that the Holy Spirit is the natural Spirit of the Son. Athanasius says in his third discourse on the Council of Nicaea: “As our nature lives divinely in Christ and He reigns in it, so in his natural

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote127" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote127); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote127\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Spirit we are and live and reign.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote128" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote128); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote128\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
The same Doctor adds in his letter to Serapion: “You have received the Spirit of adoption, that is, the natural Spirit from the nature of the natural Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote129" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote129); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote129\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Cyril comments on John: “The Son indeed exists in his own Begettor, having for himself the one begetting him; and so the Spirit of the Father truly and naturally appears to be and is the Spirit also of the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote130" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote130); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote130\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But the Spirit is not naturally of Christ according to his humanity, since he does not belong to man by nature, but is poured forth gratuitously by God on human nature; hence, the Spirit cannot be called Spirit of the Son because he filled Christ *par excellence* according to his humanity.

Similarly Athanasius states in a sermon on the Incarnation of the Word that: “The Christ, qua God the Son, sent the Spirit from on high, and as man he received the Spirit on earth. From him, therefore, unto him he (the Spirit) dwells in the humanity of the same (Christ) from his divinity.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote131" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote131); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote131\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Therefore, the Holy Spirit is not only the Spirit of Christ because he filled his humanity, but more so because he proceeds from his divinity.

One might, however, object that the Holy Spirit is of the Son according to his divinity in so far as given and sent by the Son of God, but not as existing from the Son personally and eternally. But neither can this stand on analysis. For Cyril, commenting on John, says: “The Holy Spirit is properly the Spirit of God the Father, but is no less the Spirit of God the Son, not however as two distinct Spirits.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote132" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote132); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote132\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
He also says in his exhortation to the Emperor Theodosius: “As the Holy Spirit belongs to the Father from whom he proceeds, so also in truth he belongs to his Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote133" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote133); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote133\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
If, therefore, he is of the Father, not only because he is given and sent by him in time, but also because he exists from him eternally, by the same token he is the Spirit of the Son as eternally existing of him. Cyril, commenting on John, likewise says: “The Holy Spirit exists as the truest fruit of the essence of the Son himself.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote134" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote134); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote134\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
He is, therefore, of the Son, as it were having his essence from the Son.

Hence, it is clear that since they confess the Holy Spirit to be the Spirit of Christ, they must further recognize that he is from the Son eternally.

**CHAPTER 2

That the Son sends the Holy Spirit.**

It is likewise evident on the authority of Holy Scripture that the Son sends the Holy Spirit. For in John 15:26 it is stated: When the Paraclete comes whom I shall send you, and in John 16:7: If I do not go away, he Paraclete will not come to you, but if I go, I will send him to you. On the authority of Scripture (John 14:16) it is also certain that the Father gives the Holy Spirit: I will ask the Father and he will give you another Paraclete. But that the Son gives the same Holy Spirit is clear from John 20: 22), for it is there stated that after the resurrection the Lord breathed upon the disciples and said to them: Receive the Holy Spirit. Athanasius confesses the same in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea: “How will they be consummated unless I, your Word, am consummated”, that is, assume a perfect man, “and perfect mankind within myself and grant them the Holy Spirit, my equal and in all things my cooperator?”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote135" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote135); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote135\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And the same point in the letter to Serapion: “I believe, o holy fellow priest, that you have received this Holy Spirit from the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote136" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote136); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote136\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

The same Athanasius, moreover, in the same letter says: “This is the order of divine nature from the Father in the Son that he who is from no one should be sent by no one, and he who is from another should come not in his own name, but in the name of him from whom he exists. So the Holy Spirit who is not from himself, should not come of himself, but in the name of him from whom he is and from he derives his hypostatic status as God, wherefore of him the Son says (John 14:26): The Paraclete, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote137" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote137); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote137\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
From the fact that the Holy Spirit is sent by the Son, it clearly follows that he exists eternally of the Son and derives from him his status as God.

Nicetas, commenting on John, likewise says: “The Father does not send the Holy Spirit in virtue of a property other than the one by which the Son sends him; nor does the Son send the Holy Spirit in virtue of some property by which the Father does not send him.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote138" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote138); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote138\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Whence it is clear that the Father and the Son send the Holy Spirit in virtue of the same property and on the same basis. If, therefore, the Father sends the Holy Spirit as one who exists eternally of him, similarly the Son will send the Holy Spirit as one who eternally exists of him.

So, too, Athanasius in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea, speaking in the person of the Son, says: “As you begot me perfect God and caused me to assume a perfect man, so of yourself and of my essence give them the perfect Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote139" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote139); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote139\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his letter to Serapion, “As in the Son of God the nature which he took from us remains united to him, so also he remains in us through his own Spirit coessential with him, whom in virtue of his essence he spirates from his essence and gives to us.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote140" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote140); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote140\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his sermon on the Incarnation of the Word he says” “The Holy Spirit is given to the disciples from the fullness of the Godhead.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote141" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote141); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote141\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Likewise Nicetas commenting on John says: “As the Father, the Son gives the Spirit of himself.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote142" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote142); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote142\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

From all this it is concluded that the Spirit is said to be given or sent by the Son, not only in so far as the gift of grace through which the Holy Spirit dwells in us is from the Son, but in so far as the Holy Spirit is from the Son. For it is impossible that the gift of grace, being something created, should be of the essence of the Son. But the Holy Spirit is coessential with the Son. Wherefore he can be given or sent from the essence of the Son.

Moreover, nothing but what belongs to him can be given by anyone. The Holy Spirit, therefore, is given by him whose he is, as 1 John 4:3 states: By this we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he has given us of his own Spirit. If, therefore, the Son sends or gives the Holy Spirit, the Spirit must be his. From the fact that it is his Spirit, it follows that the Spirit is from him eternally, as has been shown.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote143" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote143); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote143\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
From this, that the Son sends or gives the Holy Spirit, it follows that the Spirit likewise exists of him eternally.

**CHAPTER 3

That the Holy Spirit receives of that which is the Son’s.**

Further, on the authority of Holy Scripture it is proven that the Holy Spirit receives of that which is the Son’s. For in John 16:4, it is said: He will glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you.

Someone may object that, although the Holy Spirit receives what is the Son’s, he does not receive it from the Son; for he receives the essence of the Father from the Father, an essence identical with that of the Son, and this would explain why the Son says: He shall receive of mine. And the Lord’s words which follow (John 16:15) seem to suggest this, for he adds, almost in explanation of himself: All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said that he will take what is mine.

But from this explanation of the Lord, it is necessarily concluded that the Holy Spirit receives from the Son. If all that belongs to the Father belongs to the Son, then the authority by reason of which the Father is the principle from whom the Holy Spirit proceeds must also belong to the Son. As, therefore, the Holy Spirit receives from the Father what is the Father’s, so he receives from the Son what is the Son’s.

This is why Athanasius says in his letter to Serapion: “In teaching his Apostles and his Bride the Church Christ affirmed that from his very own being the Holy Spirit exists of himself essentially as God, saying thus: He shall receive of mine, that is, he has from my essence his divinity, so he has from me existence and speech.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote144" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote144); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote144\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And again in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea: “Whatever the Holy Spirit has, he has from the Word of God.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote145" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote145); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote145\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his letter to Serapion he says” “The Holy Spirit is coessential with the Son from he has whatever he has.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote146" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote146); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote146\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And, again, in the same letter: “The Son says: He, namely, the Holy Spirit, will glorify me, that is, as he has in himself my Godhead from me, he will prove me to be the glorious and just God, just as I glorify my Father, that is, as I have in myself his Godhead from him.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote147" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote147); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote147\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Basil writing against Eunomius says: “An attribute passes from the Father to the Son, such that the Son qua God is God from the Father, Lord from the Lord, Almighty from the Almighty, Wisdom from the Wise, Word from the highest Speaker, Power from Power; the true Son has the attributes of the Father in himself. In the same way the Holy Spirit is Lord and God, the Almighty, Wisdom, Power, naturally taking the attributes he possesses from the Lord God, Father and Son, from whom he is and by whom he is given.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote148" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote148); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote148\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

It is clear, however, that from the fact that the Son has the Godhead and whatever else he has from the Father, he is eternally from the Father. Hence, the Holy Spirit is eternally from the Father and Son as receiving from them the Godhead and whatever he has.

**CHAPTER 4

That the Son works through the Holy Spirit.**

It is also established on the authority of Sacred Scripture that the son works in the Holy Spirit or through the Holy Spirit. The Apostles in Romans 15: 18 says: For I will not venture to speak of anything except what Christ has wrought through me to win obedience from the Gentiles, by word and deed, by the power of signs and wonders, by the power of the Holy Spirit. And in 1 Cor. 2:10 it is said: God has revealed them through his Spirit. For he is the Spirit of the Father and the Son. Hence the Father and the Son work in revealing through the Holy Spirit.

This is why Athanasius says in the letter to Serapion: “The Son of God, by enlightening us in going before us and by justifying us in strengthening our faith and by unlocking the Scriptures in filling us with the gifts of wisdom, bestows his gifts while he forgives sin and endows us with his charisms, not in the spirit of another not his own, but in his own Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote149" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote149); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote149\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Cyril also says in his discourse on the dogmas of God: “The Son has by essence in himself the Holy Spirit as his own and as naturally sent from him; in him he has worked divine miracles as by his own true and proper power.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote150" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote150); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote150\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

From the fact that the Son works through the Holy Spirit it is necessarily concluded that the Holy Spirit is from the Son. Someone may be said to work through another in two ways. One way, in so far as that by which one works is a principle unto itself and cause of the operation, either as the efficient and moving cause, as the bailiff is said to work through the king; or as the formal cause, as man is said to work through his art. The other way, in so far as that by which one works is a cause in relation to the work and not to the agent, as the king is said to work through his baliff and the artist through his instrument. In this case the one working must contrariwise be called the principle of the operation in relation to that by which the operation is accomplished, as the king in relation to that by which the operation is accomplished, as the king in relation to the bailiff or the artist in relation to the instrument he uses.

When, therefore, it is said that the Son works through the Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit cannot be understood to be the principle of operation in relation to the Son, since the Son does not receive from the Holy Spirit. The only alternative, then, is that the Son is the principle of operation in relation to the Holy Spirit. And this cannot be except on this basis that he give him his operative power. But he does not give this to him as though he had it not previously, for this would imply that the Holy Spirit lacked it and so would be less than the Son. Hence, the only alternative is that he give it to him from eternity. Nor is the operative power of the Holy Spirit anything else than his essence, since the Holy Spirit, like the Father, is simple. Hence, the only alternative is that the Son give the divine essence to the Holy Spirit from eternity.

And Athanasius says this expressly in his letter to Serapion: “As the Father naturally works through the Son and in the Son originating from him and not contrariwise, so the Son naturally works in the Holy Spirit originating from him as in his own power, and not contrariwise.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote151" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote151); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote151\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 5

That the Holy Spirit is the image of the Son.**

On the authority of Sacred Scripture it is established, according to the interpretation of the Greek doctors as noted above,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote152" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote152); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote152\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
that the Holy Spirit is the image of the Son. They interpret what is said in Romans 8:29: Those whom he foreknew he predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son”, and in 1 Cor. 15: 49: Just as we have borne the image of the man of dust, so we shall also bear the image of the man of heaven, as meaning that the image of the Son is the Holy Spirit. This is why Athanasius in his letter to Serapion, speaking in the person of the Son, says: “Receive my very own image, the Holy Spirit of knowledge.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote153" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote153); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote153\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Gregory of Caesarea says: “The Holy Spirit is the perfect image of the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote154" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote154); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote154\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
It is well known, however, that an image derives from that of which it is the image. From the fact, therefore, that the Holy Spirit is the image of the Son, it follows that the Holy Spirit is from the Son.

One might indeed object that he is the image of the Son in so far as he is likened to the Son on the basis of some effect which he brings about jointly with the Son, or because he is from the Father just as the Son is. But on the basis of texts of the saints which state that the Holy Spirit is the natural image

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote155" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote155); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote155\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
of the Son this is excluded. For he could not be called the natural image of the Son, except in so far as he is likened to the Son in nature, receiving his nature from the Son. For the form of the image must always be derived from the form of that of which it is the image.

This is why Athanasius in the aforementioned letter says” “As God made himself consubstantial with the Church by assuming her form in himself, so he sealed her divinely and superabundantly with his own image, namely, the Holy Spirit by nature existing of his essence.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote156" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote156); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote156\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his Thesaurus Cyril says: “He who receives the natural image of the Son, that is, the Holy Spirit, through the Son truly possesses the same Son and the Father of the Son. How, therefore, could the Holy Spirit be numbered among creatures since he is the natural and incommunicable image of the Son of God?”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote157" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote157); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote157\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Basil writing against Eunomius says: “The natural image of the Son is his breath, the Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote158" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote158); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote158\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 6

That he is the character of the Son.**

On the same grounds the aforesaid doctors say that the Holy Spirit is the character of the Son. For Athanasius in the letter just cited says that “the Son in pouring forth the Holy Spirit stamps him as his character and very own image on the Church to reform the Church and divinely conform her to himself.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote159" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote159); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote159\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Basil in his book against Arius and Sabellius says: “As the Son gained us for the Father, he himself being from the Father, so the Spirit gains us for the Son through faith, imprinting on us in baptism the character of the Son, from whom he is and of whom he is proclaimed the true spirit and character.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote160" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote160); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote160\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 7

That he is also the seal of the Son.**

Similarly they say that the Spirit is the seal of the Son. For Athanasius in the aforementioned letter says: “The Holy Spirit is the anointing and seal, impressing the image contained in himself, in which Spirit, as truly as in his own seal, that is, by the image of his nature, God the Word seals, and marks the Church his spouse, impressing on her his very own image.” And further on: “Christ in his own image anoints, and super-anoints the Church and through him, as through his seal containing his own essence, he impresses himself on the Church his spouse.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote161" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote161); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote161\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Chrysostom commenting on Romans says: “If the Spirit is the character and seal of Christ, he who does not have the seal and character of Christ is not Christ’s.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote162" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote162); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote162\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

It is well known, however, that the character and seal are derived from him whose they are. Hence, from the texts of these Doctors it is expressly shown that the Holy Spirit derives from the Son.

The texts of these Doctors, moreover, are also confirmed by the authority of Holy Scripture. For in 2 Cor. 1:22 it is said: God who has anointed us has also put his seal upon us and given his Spirit in our hearts as his guarantee. This is to be understood, naturally, of the Father and Son, since both give us the Holy Spirit, as has been shown.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote163" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote163); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote163\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in Eph. 1: 13-14: In whom, that is, in Christ, you also, who have heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation and have believed in him, were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit, who is the guarantee of our inheritance.

**CHAPTER 8

That the Holy Spirit is from the Father through the Son.**

It is also taught by the aforesaid Doctors that the Holy Spirit is from the Father through the Son. For in his *Thesaurus* Cyril says: “God the Father by his own right hand, that is, by his power and wisdom, brought all things into being in his one true and life-giving and divinizing Spirit coessential with himself, whom in essence he spirated from himself through the same Son by nature coeternal with him.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote164" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote164); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote164\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Basil says: “The Son is not the Son of the Spirit because the Spirit is from God the Father through the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote165" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote165); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote165\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And writing against Eunomius the same Saint says: “If from your own word, O you who resist the truth, from your very own intelligence your produce a spirit by beating the air with a word not of the same kind, do you doubt the Holy Spirit proceeds in an intellectual manner from the Father through the only-begotten Son?” And further on: “The Son calls himself the Word of the Father and unhesitatingly declares to us that the Spirit is of the Father through himself, the Word.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote166" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote166); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote166\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Thus, it is shown conclusively that the Spirit is from the Son. For it was remarked above

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote167" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote167); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote167\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
that when anyone is said to work through something, that something must be a principle of operation for the agent, or at the least must be a principle of operation for that in which the operation terminates. But the Son cannot be a principle of spiration for the Father. Hence, if the Father spirates the Holy Spirit through the Son, it necessarily follows that the Son is a principle of the Holy Spirit.

The same is proven from the statement of Gregory of Nyssa: “We hold the Holy Spirit is from the Father through the mediation of the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote168" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote168); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote168\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
For so the Holy Spirit is said to be from the Father through the Son, in as much as the Father is the principle of the Son, and the Son is the principle of the Holy Spirit.

**CHAPTER 9

That the Holy Spirit is from the Son.**

But this is the point where authorities from the Greek Fathers are to be adduced stating that the Holy Spirit is from the Son. For in his letter to Serapion Athanasius says: “Christ said (John 16: 13) of his Spirit: He will not speak of himself, but will speak whatever he shall hear, that is, not as though an unoriginated Spirit, a property of the Father alone, but above all in the proper sense he is from the Son himself from whom he receives the divine essence and from whom he also hears whatever he speaks.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote169" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote169); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote169\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Against Arius and Sabellius Basil says: “How does the Holy Spirit adopt in the Son, if he is a stranger to Father and Son? How does he, an outsider, dwell in those Christ redeems, if he is not from Christ?”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote170" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote170); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote170\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 10

That he is jointly from Father and Son.**

Lest anyone object that the Holy Spirit proceeds one way from the Father, but another from the Son, both these Doctors assert that he proceeds jointly from both. So Epiphanius says in his book on the Trinity, “God from God the Father and the Son is the Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote171" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote171); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote171\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 11

That he is from both from eternity**

If anyone says that the Holy Spirit is said to be from the Father and the Son in the sense of being temporally sent by them and not existing from them from eternity, this is shown to be false from what follows. For the same Epiphanius says in his book on the skin dresses of Adam and Eve: “As Christ says, the Spirit of Truth which proceeds from the Father shall also receive from what is mine. So the Spirit always exists from both of the two.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote172" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote172); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote172\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
He also says in a sermon on the Incarnation of the Word: “The Father, after all, always existed; the Son always existed, and the Holy Spirit always existed from the Father and the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote173" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote173); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote173\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
He is therefore eternally from both.

**CHAPTER 12

That the Holy Spirit is a person from persons.**

So, too, from texts of the same Doctors it is established that the Holy Spirit is a person from the persons of Father and Son. For Athanasius says in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea: “Holy Mother Church here assembled damns the inventions of his heresy”, namely of the Arians, “and confesses the Holy Spirit to be uncreated, true God, a hypostasis from the hypostases of Father and Son, and coessential with them.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote174" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote174); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote174\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Epiphanius in his Ancoratus says: “The Holy Spirit in himself is a true hypostasis, not other or different essentially from the Father and the Son, but truly existing of the same essence, a hypostasis in himself from the hypostases, however, of Father and Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote175" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote175); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote175\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Hence, he is from Father and Son, not only in relation to the gift of grace in which he is given or sent, but by reason of his very person. He is, therefore, from Father and Son from eternity.

**CHAPTER 13

That he is also from the essence of Father and Son.**

So, too, from texts of the aforementioned it is proven that he is from the essence of Father and Son. For in the discourse on the Council of Nicaea Athanasius says: “Remission of all sins and of every blasphemy is accomplished in the Holy Spirit, who, as was said, being from the essence of the Father and the Son shares their power, with them creating and disposing all things.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote176" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote176); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote176\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Again, in his letter to Serapion he says: “Christ of his own and the Father’s common essence spirated the eternally existing Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote177" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote177); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote177\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And further on: “Christ in his own Holy Spirit, existing as noted above of his own essence, forgives us all.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote178" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote178); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote178\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in the same letter: “The Holy Spirit existing of the Son by one and the same divinity of Father and Son is one.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote179" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote179); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote179\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 14

That he also is naturally from the Son.**

So, too, it is established that he is naturally from the Son. For Cyril says: “Who is life? Christ himself who said (John 14:6): I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, as it were, his Spirit truly and naturally existing in him and of him lays down the law of the spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote180" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote180); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote180\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

From this is is proven that the Holy Spirit is from the Son, not merely as given or sent in time, but as proceeding from him eternally, as receiving from him eternally, as receiving from him his essence and nature.

This can also be proven from the very turn of phrase of the aforesaid Doctors for not only do they say that the Holy Spirit is of the Son, which could refer merely to a temporal mission, but also that he exists by the Son, which can refer only to the eternal procession; for each thing exists in so far as it is in itself. For Cyril, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, says: “The Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and exists from the Godhead of Father and Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote181" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote181); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote181\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And against Eunomius Basil says: “The Holy Spirit has being from the Son and from him receives what he announces to us.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote182" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote182); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote182\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 15

That the Son also spirates the Holy Spirit.**

Further, it is expressly established from texts of the aforementioned that the Son spirates the Holy Spirit. For Athanasius in his letter to Serapion says: “The Son, begotten of the Father, from his immense essence spirates, not outside himself, but within himself, God the Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote183" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote183); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote183\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Cyril, too, in his exhortation to the Emperor Theodosius, says: “The Savior produces and spirates from himself the Spirit, just as the Father does.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote184" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote184); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote184\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 16

That the Son spirates he has from a personal property.**

Lest anyone object that the Son does not spirate the Holy Spirit in the proper sense of the term, the Son is called by these Doctors the spirator of the Holy Spirit, having precisely from a personal property that he should spirate the Holy Spirit. For Athanasius says in his letter to Serapion” “The heretics blaspheme and deny the Son, the Spirator of the true Spirit, the Paraclete.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote185" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote185); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote185\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And again in the same letter: “He who blasphemes against the Spirit spirated also blasphemes his Spirator, that is, the Son, and through the Son he blasphemes his Father.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote186" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote186); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote186\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Against Eunomius Basil also says: “Without any doubt we believe the Son to be the Spirator and giver of the Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote187" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote187); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote187\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 17

That on the same grounds he is spirated by Father and Son.**

To show, however, that the Holy Spirit is spirated on the same grounds jointly by the Father and Son, Athanasius says in the just cited letter to Serapion that the Son co-spirates with the Father: “God the Father through God the Word, not indeed as through an organ —God forbid— but through a co-spirator, co-essential with his own truly living essence, he spirates the living and divinizing Breath, fully God and blessed Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote188" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote188); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote188\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 18

That he is spirated from the Son eternally.**

Lest someone object that this spiration pertains to the temporal procession, the aforesaid Doctors state that the Holy Spirit is spirated eternally by the Son. For Athanasius says in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea,speaking in the person of the Son: “That the world may believe that the Spirit, the Paraclete, is in essence and from eternity spirated by me.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote189" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote189); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote189\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his *Thesaurus* Cyril says: “We believe and confess that the Holy Spirit, from eternity and in essence spirated by Christ, exists as God.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote190" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote190); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote190\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 19

That the Holy Spirit is spirated from the essence of the Son.**

Also confirmatory of this is the fact that in the same texts it is stated that the Holy Spirit is spirated from the essence of the Son. For Athanasius says in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea: “We adore the Breath of life from the essence of the Son, the Spirit, the coeternally spirated God.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote191" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote191); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote191\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And again in the same work: “From his essence God spirated the Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote192" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote192); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote192\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his letter to Serapion: “The heretics are disinherited by the Son because they do not accept the Holy Spirit as in essence God spirated from his essence.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote193" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote193); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote193\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in the same letter explaining as it were what “from his essence” means, that is, “from himself as essence”, he says as follows: “The Son born of the Father, truly possessing in himself the Father’s nature, retained not the property of paternity, but that of natural communicability, so that of himself from himself as his own essence he should spirate not a son by generation, but the Spirit, equal and coeternal with him as God in all things.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote194" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote194); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote194\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And the same point it repeatedly made in his texts.

From this it is clear that when it is asserted that the Holy Spirit is spirated by the Son, this cannot be said in reference only to his temporal procession, but to his eternal as well whereby the Holy Spirit receives the divine essence from the Son.

**CHAPTER 20

That the Holy Spirit emanates from the Son**

Texts from the same Fathers refer to the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Son by the word “emanation”. For Athanasius says in the same letter to Serapion: “The living Spirit emanating from the living Word, like an unfailing power coming from strength, is poured out on the Church.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote195" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote195); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote195\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Theodoretus says on the letter to the Ephesians: “The Holy Spirit from above emanates from Christ, and is given without jealousy to all who receive him.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote196" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote196); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote196\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 21

That the Holy Spirit flows from the Son and this from eternity.**

The same Doctors, moreover, also employ the term ‘outflowing’ to demonstrate the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Son. For Athanasius in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea, speaking in the person of Christ, says: “I send Apostles into the world, not in the power of man, but in the power of the Holy Spirit flowing out of my own essence.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote197" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote197); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote197\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in the same discourse: “If it is not to be believed and preached of the Holy Spirit that he is the truth of the Father and Son, coessential with both, flowing out of their essence, how in the divine creed of saving baptism does God the Son, our Savior, count him with the Father and Himself as cooperating to effect our salvation?”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote198" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote198); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote198\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his letter to Serapion he says: “The Holy Spirit caused it to be believed and proclaimed by the Fathers at Nicaea that the Son is coessential with him, as it were God flowing out of his essence.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote199" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote199); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote199\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Cyril in the *Thesaurus* says: “When the Holy Spirit is poured out on us, he reveals us configured to God; for he flows out of the Father and the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote200" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote200); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote200\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

From this it is also established that the Holy Spirit is eternally from the Son, precisely in having the divine essence from him.

**CHAPTER 22

That the Son also originates the Holy Spirit.**

From these authorities it is also proven that the Son originates the Holy Spirit. For Athanasius in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea says: “The Son himself, naturally and eternally of himself qua God, in spirating originates the Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote201" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote201); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote201\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his letter to Serapion he says that “the Son works in the Holy Spirit originated by him naturally, as in his own power.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote202" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote202); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote202\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
It hardly seems proper to restrict this to the temporal procession; for someone is originated of him from whom he has his being; for to originate means to give someone origin.

**CHAPTER 23

That the Son is the author of the Holy Spirit.**

It is also established from the aforesaid Doctors that the Son is author of the Holy Spirit. For Athanasius in his letter to Serapion says: “The Apostle attributes what the Spirit works and effects in him to the Son, his author, as the Son attributes to God the Father, his author, the works he performs.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote203" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote203); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote203\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Authority of one person in relation to another among the divine persons only exists insofar as one is from another eternally. Hence, the Holy Spirit is from the Son eternally.

**CHAPTER 24

That the Son is also principle of the Holy Spirit.**

It is also proven from the aforesaid authorities that the Son is the principle of the Holy Spirit. For Gregory Nazianzen says in his discourse on the Council of Constantinople: “We believe the holy Trinity” namely, the Father without a principle, the Son, however, a principle from a principle, the Father, but the Holy Spirit with the Son as principle, to be one God throughout all and over all.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote204" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote204); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote204\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But the Father is principle of the Son in this that the Son is from him eternally. Hence, the Holy Spirit is from the Son eternally.

**CHAPTER 25

That the Son is also source of the Holy Spirit.**

It is established from the same authorities that the Son is source of the Holy Spirit. For Athanasius in his discourse on the Council of Nicaea says: “Just as the Spirit is in the Son as a stream in its source, and just as the Son is in the Father as splendor in the sun of glory by nature, so by the grace of the Holy Spirit the elect are in the Father and the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote205" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote205); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote205\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in his letter to Serapion he says: As a fountain and as light the Son is indeed with the Father; of this fountain and light the Holy Spirit is the true stream and the splendor of eternal glory.” And in the same letter he says: “For the Holy Spirit does not work in God, the Christ and Word, namely, in his natural source.” And further on: “The begotten Son and source of the Holy Spirit, between whom he holds the middle place.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote206" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote206); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote206\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Athanasius in his sermon on the Incarnation of the Word says: “David sings in the psalm (35:10), saying: For with you is the font of life; because jointly with the Father the Son indeed is the source of the Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote207" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote207); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote207\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

From this it is also proven that the Son is the principle of the Holy Spirit as one existing of him eternally.

**CHAPTER 26

The general conclusion: that the Spirit proceeds from the Son.**

After so many testimonies, however, certain adversaries

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote208" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote208); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote208\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
(meaning the Greek theologians opposing the Latins from the time of Photius) of the truth refuse to confess the true faith, saying that although the Holy Spirit has been shown to exist, to be spirated, to emanate, and to flow out of the Son, nonetheless that he proceeds from the Son is not to be admitted. For this is not contained in any of the cited authorities; nor in any authority of Holy Scripture, which states that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father, without however joining the Son in this to the Father, when in John 15:26 it is said: When the Paraclete comes, whom I shall send you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who proceeds from the Father. Accordingly, it must be shown how on the basis of the foregoing it necessarily follows that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son.

Now, of all the words relating to origin, the term procession is found to be more generic

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote209" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote209); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote209\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
and less specific of a mode of origin. For according to accepted usage we designate as proceeding whatever is from another in any way whatsoever, whether this be naturally from another as Peter is said to proceed from his father, or emissively as breath proceeds from someone breathing, or flowingly as a stream proceeds from a source, or artificially as a house proceeds from a builder, or locally as the bridegroom proceeds from the bridal chamber.

Not everything, however, in any way from another can be described as being spirated, or begotten, or flowing, or emitted. Hence, the term procession is also particularly suitable

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote210" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote210); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote210\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
to express the origin of the divine persons, for, as observed previously,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote211" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote211); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote211\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
the divine is better designated by generic rather than specific terms. So, from any of the points which have been discussed, namely, that the Holy Spirit exists of the Son, flows from him, or is spirated or emanates, it is necessarily concluded that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote212" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote212); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote212\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 27

That in the divine person to flow and to proceed is the same.**

Again Cyril says in his explanation of the Nicene Creed: “The Spirit is coessential with the Father and the Son and flows forth, that is, proceeds from God and Father as from a source.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote213" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote213); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote213\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
From this it is established that in the divine persons to flow forth and to proceed are synonymous. The Holy Spirit flows forth from the Son as was demonstrated above;

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote214" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote214); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote214\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
therefore he proceeds from the Son.

This, moreover, is further confirmed by this statement he makes in his letter sent to Nestorius, namely, that “Christ is the truth and the Holy Spirit flows forth from him as he does from God and Father.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote215" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote215); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote215\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
If, therefore, to flow forth from the Father is the same as to proceed from him, from this that he flows from the Son he is shown to proceed from him.

Gregory Nazianzen also says in his sermon on the Epiphany: “Whence the Holy Spirit is, thence he proceeds.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote216" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote216); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote216\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But, as has been proven, he is from the Son. Therefore, he proceeds from the Son. Cyril, too, says in his commentary on Joel: “The Holy Spirit belongs to Christ himself and is in him and from him, just as he is understood to be from God and Father.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote217" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote217); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote217\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Maximus the monk says in his sermon on the candlestick and the seven lights: “Just as the Holy Spirit naturally exists by God the Father according to his essence, so also he truly exists by the Son according to his nature and essence, as it were proceeding as God from the Father through the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote218" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote218); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote218\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Likewise Athanasius in his letter to Serapion says: “As the Son is by nature related to the Father, so the Holy Spirit is related to the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote219" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote219); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote219\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in the same letter, speaking in the person of the Son, he says: “The Spirit has the same nature and relationship toward me, the Son, so as to be God of God, as I have toward the Father so as to be God of God.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote220" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote220); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote220\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Basil, too, against Eunomius says: “As the Son is related to the Father, so in the same way the Holy Spirit is related to the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote221" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote221); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote221\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But the Son is related to the Father as proceeding from him. For in John 8: 42 he says: I have proceeded and came from God. Therefore, the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son.

But Epiphanius even uses the word procession in his book on the Trinity” “In the same way as no one knows the Father except the Son and no one knows the Son except the Father (Matt. 11:27), so I dare to say that no one knows the Holy Spirit except the Father and the Son from whom he receives and from whom he proceeds.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote222" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote222); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote222\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

And Athanasius on the Creed says: “The Holy Spirit is from the Father and the Son, not made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote223" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote223); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote223\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 28

That to demonstrate the procession of the Holy Spirit the Greek and Latin Doctors use the same arguments.**

That the Greek Doctors use the same arguments to demonstrate the procession of the Holy Spirit as do the Latin Doctors should also be pondered. In his book on the procession of the Holy Spirit

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote224" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote224); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote224\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Anselm argues for the procession of the Holy Spirit on these grounds that Father and Son are of one essence. From this it follows that Father and Son do not differ from each other except that the former is the Father and the latter the Son. To have the Holy Spirit proceeding from himself pertains neither to the notion of paternity nor to that of filiation; for the Father is not called Father because the Holy Spirit proceeds from him. Nor is it contrary to the notion of filiation that the Son should have the Spirit proceeding from him. Hence, the only remaining conclusion is that to have the Holy Spirit proceeding from oneself is common to Father and Son.

And similarly Nicetas commenting on John argues thus: “From the fact that the Son has in his essence everything belonging to the Father, he also has the Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote225" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote225); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote225\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Cyril says in his *Thesaurus*: “The Apostle says that the Spirit of Christ and the Spirit of the Father are truly one and not many, because all things belonging to the Father truly and in the proper sense pass naturally to the true Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote226" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote226); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote226\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

From this, however, it is clear that when in the Gospel the Holy Spirit is said to proceed from the Father, he is to be understood to proceed as well as from the Son, even though in the Gospel this is not added. For those things which are predicated of the Father must be understood of the Son as well,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote227" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote227); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote227\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
even when predicated exclusively; as stated in John 17:3: That they may know you, the only God. And in 1 Tim. 6:15: Whom, that is, Christ, God will cause to appear in his own time- God, the blessed and only Ruler, the King of kings and Lord of lords, who alone is immortal. For these things are understood as true of the Son as well, because Father and Son are one in essence, as is asserted in John 10: 30: I and the Father are one.

Since, therefore, to have the Spirit proceeding from oneself is common to Father and Son, exactly as anything predicated of them essentially, as is clear from what has been said, then when it is said in the Gospel (cf. John 15: 26) that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father, he must be understood to proceed also from the Son; just as when in the same Creed the Father is said to be the Almighty, the Creator of things visible and invisible, the Son must be understood equally so.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote228" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote228); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote228\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 29

That the Holy Spirit is distinguished from the Son in this that he is from him.**

It is also shown from the texts of the aforesaid Fathers that the Holy Spirit is distinguished from the Son, because he is from him. Gregory of Nyssa teaching dogmatically about the Godhead says: “We confess the divine nature to be immutable; but we do not deny the difference between cause and thing caused”, that is, as explained above,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote229" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote229); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote229\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
the distinction between the principle and that which is from the principle. Afterwards he adds: “We also recognize another difference, namely, between one who is the Relative from the First”, that is, the Son from the Father, and “the other who is from the Relative and from the First”, that is, the Spirit who is from the Father and the Son.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote230" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote230); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote230\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

It is clear, therefore, that in virtue of the first difference the Holy Spirit and Son are distinguished from the Father; in virtue of the second the Holy Spirit is distinguished from the Son, namely, because the Son proceeds from the Father not through the Spirit, but the Spirit proceeds from the Son. Similarly, Richard of St. Victor in book five on the Trinity

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote231" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote231); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote231\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
also shows the difference between the two processions from this that the Son proceeds from only one person, whereas the Holy Spirit proceeds from two. According to the views of both the only possible conclusion is that the Son and Holy Spirit would not be distinguished from one another unless one were from the other.

**CHAPTER 30

That the distinction of persons should be according to some order of nature.**

Similarly, the distinction of persons should rest on an order which is natural, as Augustine says.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote232" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote232); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote232\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Hence, Athanasius in his letter to Serapion likens the order of distinct persons to a chain: “Indeed, just as he who pulls the head link of a chain pulls also its middle link, and against the Father, the opposite extremity, so he who blasphemes also against the Spirit, the third person, blasphemes also against the Son, the middle link, and against the Father, the opposite link, the head of the chain of the triune, distinct, unconfused divine order. Contrariwise, he who believes and receives the Spirit as God, receives God and the Son whose he is and from whom he is, just as one who holds one end of a chain pulling it toward himself, holds the middle and through the middle grasps the other end.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote233" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote233); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote233\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

For this reason he also says in the same letter: “The Spirit Paraclete, the term of the blessed and transcendent divine order, infallibly constitutes the proper termination of this order in himself by his own hypostasis, just as the Father himself without principle contains the head and frontal origin of this order. The Son, however, occupies the intermediate position of this order between its extremes, namely the Father and the Holy Spirit.” And shortly after: “The Father from himself, as origin of the triune divine order, through the medium of his begotten Son established by a natural property the term of this very order in the third person, the spirated Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote234" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote234); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote234\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Cyril also says in the *Thesaurus*: “The Holy Spirit is by nature from the Son and is sent by him to the creature, to work the renewal of the Church and to be the term of the Holy Trinity.” And he concludes: “If this is so, then God from God the Son is the Holy Spirit.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote235" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote235); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote235\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
For if the Holy Spirit were not from the Son, the Holy Spirit would no more be the term of the Trinity than the Son, nor would the order of the Trinity be likened to a chain but rather to a triangle.

Richard of St. Victor also touches on this argument in book five on the Trinity,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote236" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote236); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote236\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
where he shows that among the divine persons there can be only one person from another person from whom another person does not proceed, nor can there be two persons from only one person. Either of these alternatives would be in contradiction to the aforesaid order among the divine persons, but both would be posited if the Holy Spirit did not proceed from the Son.

Cyril in his *Thesaurus*

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote237" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote237); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote237\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
explains this order among the divine persons via another analogy employed on the authority of Holy Scripture, which in the Gospel calls the Holy Spirit the finger of God: If I by the finger of God drive out demons (Luke 11:20), and the parallel passage in another Gospel: If I in the Spirit of God, etc. (Matt. 12: 28). The Son, however, is called the arm of God: Clothe yourself with strength, O arm of the Lord (Is. 51: 9). Cyril says: “As the arm and hand exist naturally from the body and prolong it, and as the finger extends naturally from the hand, so from God the Father, as his arm and hand, the Son naturally arises by generation God from God, and from the Son as from the natural hand of the Father God the Holy Spirit called finger is produced, flowing forth naturally.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote238" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote238); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote238\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

To conclude, therefore, the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son for reasons affirmed equally by the Latin and Greek Doctors.

**CHAPTER 31

That to believe the Holy Spirit is from the Son is necessary for salvation.**

It frequently happens that when disputants disagree, the points on which they disagree are not necessary to salvation. Lest anyone think that believing the Holy Spirit to be from the Son is not necessary to the faith by which we are saved, it should be shown from texts of the Greek Doctors that such is necessary for faith and salvation.

For Athanasius says in his letter to Serapion: “In accord with the command of the Apostle (Tit. 3:10): After a first and second correction avoid a heretic, even those you might see flying through the air with Elijah or walking dryshod on the water like Peter and Moses; unless they profess just as we profess that the Holy Spirit is God naturally existing from God the Son, as the son also is naturally God begotten eternally and existing of God and Father, you are not to receive them.” And again: “Have no communion with those who blaspheme and deny that the Holy Spirit is God from the nature of God the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote239" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote239); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote239\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Likewise Cyril in his *Thesaurus* says: “It is necessary for our salvation to confess that the Holy Spirit exists of the essence of the Son, as existing of him by nature.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote240" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote240); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote240\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
So, too, Epiphanius in his book on the Trinity: “You cut yourself off from the grace of God when you do not admit the Son to be from the Father or say that the Holy Spirit is not from the Father and the Son.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote241" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote241); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote241\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

It is, therefore, clear that in no way are they to be tolerated who deny the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son.

**CHAPTER 32

That the Roman Pontiff is the first and greatest among all bishops.**

The error of those who say that the Vicar of Christ, the Pontiff of the Roman Church, does not have a primacy over the universal Church is similar to the error of those who say that the Holy Spirit does not proceed from the Son. For Christ himself, the Son of God, consecrates and marks her as his own with the Holy Spirit, as it were with his own character and seal, as the authorities already

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote242" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote242); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote242\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
cited make abundantly clear. And in like manner the Vicar of Christ by his primacy and foresight as a faithful servant keeps the Church Universal subject to Christ. It must, then, be shown from texts of the aforesaid Greek Doctors that the Vicar of Christ holds the fullness of power over the whole Church of Christ.

Now, that the Roman Pontiff, the successor of Peter and Vicar of Christ, is the first and greatest of all the bishops, is expressly stated in the canon of the Council which reads: “According to the Scriptures and definition of the canon we venerate the most holy bishop of old Rome as the first and greatest of all the bishops.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote243" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote243); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote243\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

This, moreover, accords well with Sacred Scripture, which both in the Gospels and in the Acts of the Apostles (cf. Matt. 16:18; John 21:17; Acts 1: 15-16, 2:14, 15:17) assigns first place among the Apostles to Peter. Hence, Chrysostom commenting on the text of Matthew !8: 1: The disciples came to Jesus and asked, who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven, says: “For they had created in their minds a human stumbling block, which they could no longer keep to themselves; nor did they control their hearts’ pride, because they saw that Peter was preferred to them and was given a more honorable place.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote244" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote244); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote244\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 33

That the same Pontiff has universal jurisdiction over the entire Church of Christ.**

It is also shown that the Vicar of Christ has universal jurisdiction over the entire Church of Christ. For it is recorded of the Council of Chalcedon how the whole synod acclaimed Pope Leo: “Long live Leo, the most holy, apostolic, and ecumenical, that is, universal patriarch.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote245" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote245); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote245\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

And Chrysostom commenting on Matthew says: “The power

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote246" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote246); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote246\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
which is of the Father and of the Son himself the Son conferred worldwide on Peter and gave a mortal man authority over all things in heaven, giving him the keys in order that he might extend the Church throughout the world.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote247" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote247); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote247\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And in homily 85 on John: “He allocated James a determined territory, but he appointed Peter master and teacher of the whole world.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote248" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote248); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote248\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Again, commenting on the Acts of the Apostles: “Not like Moses over one people, but throughout the whole world Peter received from the Son power over all those who are His sons.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote249" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote249); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote249\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

This is also taught on the authority of Holy Scripture. For Christ entrusted hi sheep to the care of Peter without restriction, when he said in the last chapter of John (21:15): Feed my sheep; and in John 10:16: That there might be one fold and one shepherd.

**CHAPTER 34

That the same possesses in the Church a fullness of power.**

It is also established from the texts of the aforesaid Doctors that the Roman Pontiff possesses a fullness of power in the Church. For Cyril, the Patriarch of Alexandria, says in his *Thesaurus*: “As Christ coming forth from Israel as leader and sceptre of the Church of the Gentiles was granted by the Father the fullest power over every principality and power and whatever is that all might bend the knee to him, so he entrusted most fully the fullest power to Peter and his successors.” And again: “To no one else but Peter and to him alone Christ gave what is his fully.” And further on: “The feet of Christ are his humanity, that is, the man himself, to whom the whole Trinity gave the fullest power, whom one of the Three assumed in the unity of his person and lifted up on high to the Father above every principality and power, so that all the angels of God might adore him (Heb. 1:6); which whole and entire he has left in sacrament and power to Peter and to his Church.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote250" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote250); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote250\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

And Chrysostom says to the Bulgarian delegation

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote251" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote251); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote251\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
speaking in the person of Christ: “Three times I ask you whether you love me, because you denied me three times out of fear and trepidation. Now restored, however, lest the brethren believe you to have lost the grace and authority of the keys, I now confirm in you that which is fully mine, because you love me in their presence.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote252" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote252); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote252\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

This is also taught on the authority of Scripture. For in Matthew 16: 19 the Lord said to Peter without restriction: Whatsoever you shall bind upon earth shall be bound in heaven.

**CHAPTER 35

That he enjoys the same power conferred on Peter by Christ.**

It is also shown that Peter is the Vicar of Christ and the Roman Pontiff is Peter’s successor enjoying the same power conferred on Peter by Christ. For the canon of the Council of Chalcedon says: “If any bishop is sentenced as guilty of infamy, he is free to appeal the sentence to the blessed bishop of old Rome, whom we have as Peter the rock of refuge, and to him alone, in the place of God, with unlimited power, is granted the authority to hear the appeal of a bishop accused of infamy in virtue of the keys given him by the Lord.” And further on: “And whatever has been decreed by him is to be held as from the vicar of the apostolic throne.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote253" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote253); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote253\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Likewise, Cyril, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, says, speaking in the person of Christ” “You for a while, but I without end will be fully and perfectly in sacrament and authority with all those whom I shall put in your place, just as I am with you.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote254" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote254); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote254\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Cyril of Alexandria in his *Thesaurus* says that the Apostles “in the Gospels and Epistles have affirmed in all their teaching that Peter and his Church are in the place of the Lord, granting him participation in every chapter and assembly, in every election and proclamation of doctrine.” And further on: “To him, that is, to Peter, all by divine ordinance bow the head and the rulers of the world obey him as the Lord himself.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote255" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote255); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote255\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Chrysostom, speaking in the person of Christ, says: “Feed my sheep (John 21:17), that is, in my place be in charge of your brethren.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote256" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote256); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote256\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 36

That to him belongs the right of deciding what pertains to faith.**

It is also demonstrated that to the aforesaid Pontiff belongs the right of deciding what pertains to faith. For Cyril in his *Thesaurus* says: “Let us remain as members in our head on the apostolic throne of the Roman Pontiffs, from whom it is our duty to seek what we must believe and what we must hold.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote257" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote257); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote257\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Maximus in the letter addressed to the Orientals says: “All the ends of the earth which have sincerely received the Lord and Catholics everywhere professing the true faith look to the Church of the Romans as to the sun, and receive from it the light of the Catholic and Apostolic Faith.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote258" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote258); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote258\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Rightly so, for Peter is recorded as the first to have, while the Lord was enlightening him, confessed the faith perfectly when he said to him (Matt. 16:16): You are the Christ, the Son of the living God. And hence the Lord also said to him (Lk. 22:32): I have prayed for you, Peter, that your faith may not fail.”

**CHAPTER 37

That he is the superior of the other patriarchs.**

It is also clear that he is the superior of the other patriarchs from this statement of Cyril: “It is his”, namely, of the Roman Pontiffs of the apostolic throne, “exclusive right to reprove, correct, enact, resolve, dispose and bind in the name of Him who established it.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote259" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote259); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote259\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Chrysostom commenting on the Acts of the Apostles says that “Peter is the most holy summit of the blessed apostolic choir, the good shepherd.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote260" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote260); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote260\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

And this also is manifest on the authority of the Lord, in Luke 22:32 saying: “You, once converted, confirm your brethren.”

**CHAPTER 38

That to be subject to the Roman Pontiff is necessary for salvation.**

It is also shown that to be subject to the Roman Pontiff is necessary for salvation. For Cyril says in his *Thesaurus*: “Therefore, brethren, if you imitate Christ so as to hear his voice remaining in the Church of Peter and so as not be puffed up by the wind of pride, lest perhaps because of our quarrelling the wily serpent drive us from paradise as once he did Eve.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote261" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote261); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote261\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
And Maximus in the letter addressed to the Orientals says: “The Church united and established upon the rock of Peter’s confession we call according to the decree of the Savior the universal Church, wherein we must remain for the salvation of our souls and wherein loyal to his faith and confession we must obey him.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote262" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote262); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote262\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 39

Against the position of those who deny the Sacrament may be confected with unleavened bread.**

But just as the aforesaid misguided persons sin against the unity of the mystical Body by denying the plenary power of the Roman Pontiff, so they sin against the purity of the sacrament of the Body of Christ, saying that the Body of Christ cannot be consecrated from unleavened bread. This, too, is disproved from texts of the Greek Doctors.

For Chrysostom commenting on the Gospel pericope, On the first day of the unleavened bread, says: “The first day he says is Thursday, on which observers of the Law began to celebrate the Passover, that is, to eat unleavened bread, absolutely free of yeast. The Lord, therefore, sends his disciples on Thursday, which the Evangelist calls the first day of the unleavened bread, on which in the evening the Savior ate the Passover; in this deed, as in all he did from the beginning of his circumcision to the final day of his passover, he clearly showed that he was not opposed to divine laws.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote263" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote263); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote263\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
But it is obvious that he would have acted against the law if he had used leavened bread. Hence it is clear that in the institution of this sacrament Christ consecrated his body from unleavened bread.

It should be remarked,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote264" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote264); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote264\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
however, that some

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote265" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote265); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote265\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
claim Christ anticipated the day of unleavened bread because his passion was at hand, and so used leavened bread. This they attempt to show on two grounds. First, because in John 13: 1, it is said that before the feast of the Passover Jesus celebrated with his disciples the supper in which he consecrated his body, as the Apostle teaches in 1 Cor. 11: 21. Whence it seems that Christ celebrated the Passover before the day of the unleavened bread, and so in the consecration of his body he used leavened bread. Further, they would confirm this by noting that according to John 18: 28, on the Friday on which Christ was crucified the Jews did not enter the praetorium of Pilate in order that they might not defile, but eat the Passover. But the Passsover is called the unleavened bread. They therefore conclude that the supper was celebrated before the unleavened bread.

To this, however, Chrysostom replies, commenting on that very text of John: That they might not be defiled, etc.: “What does this mean, but that they ate the Passover on another day and broke the law in order that they might fulfill the most wicked desire of their soul in the death of Christ; Christ, however, did not transgress Holy Thursday in paschal week, but on that day he ate the Passover.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote266" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote266); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote266\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

But since this is not certain, it might be better to say that, as the Lord commands in Exodus 12:18-19, the feast of the unleavened bread was observed throughout seven days, of which the first day, that is, the fifteenth day of the month, was holier and more solemn than the others. But because among the Jews solemn feasts began to be celebrated on the preceding evening, the unleavened bread began to be eaten on the fourteenth day in the evening and was eaten during the seven following days. That is why it is said in the same chapter: In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month in the evening, you shall eat the unleavened bread, until the twenty-first day of the month in the evening; for seven days leaven shall not be found in your houses. And on the same fourteenth day in the evening the paschal lamb was sacrificed.

Hence, the first day of the unleavened bread is called by the three Evangelists, Matthew 26: 17; Mark 14:12; and Luke 22:7, the fourteenth day of the month, because toward evening the unleavened bread was eaten and then the Passover, that is, the paschal lamb was sacrificed. And, according to John 13: 1, this was before the feast of the Passover, that is, before the fifteenth day of the month, because this was the most solemn day on which the Jews wished to eat the Passover, that is, the unleavened paschal bread as well as the paschal lamb. Thus, there being no disagreement among the Evangelists, it is plain that Christ consecrated his body from unleavened bread at the supper.

Clearly, also, this is more fitting for the purity of the mystical Body, that is, the Church, typified in this sacrament. Hence, Gregory Nazianzen says in his sermon on the feast of the Passover of the Lord: “Let us celebrate a feast to the Lord with jubilation, not in the leaven of malice and wickedness, but in the unleavened bread of sincerity and purity (1 Cor. 5:8).”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote267" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote267); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote267\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

We do not, however, mean by this that the sacrament may not be confected using leavened bread. For Pope Gregory says in his Register: “The Roman Church offers unleavened bread because the Word of the Father took flesh without any carnal conmingling; but other Churches offer leavened bread because the Word of the Father is clothed with flesh and is true God and true man. So, also, yeast is mixed with flour and this becomes the true body of our Lord Jesus Christ.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote268" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote268); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote268\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 40

That there exists a purgatory wherein souls are cleansed from sins not cleansed in the present life.**

The power of this sacrament, however, is lessened by those who deny here exists a purgatory after death; for on the souls in purgatory special healing is conferred by this sacrament. For Gregory of Nyssa in his sermon on the dead says: “If anyone her in his frail life has been less than able to cleanse himself of sin, after departing hence, through the blazing fire of purgatory the penalty is the more quickly paid, the more and more the ever-faithful Bride offers to her Spouse in memory of his passion gifts and holocausts on behalf of the children she has brought forth for that Spouse by word and sacrament; just as we preach in fidelity to this dogmatic truth, so we believe.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote269" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote269); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote269\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

Likewise Theodoret, Bishop of Cyr, commenting on that passage of 1 Cor. 3: 11: If any man’s work burn, etc., says thus: “The Apostle states that one is saved thus as through a blazing fire cleansing whatever accumulated through carelessness in life’s activity, or at least from the dust of the feet of earthly living. In this fire one remains so long as any earthly and bodily affections are being purged. For such a person holy Mother Church pays and devoutly offers peace offerings, and so through this such a one emerging clean and pure assists immaculate before the most pure eyes of the Lord of hosts.”

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote270" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote270); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote270\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

**CHAPTER 41

EPILOGUE**

Most holy Father, these are the points which at your command I have excerpted from the texts of the Greek Doctors, both to be clarified and to be cited in confirmation of the true faith. Scattered, however, among the aforementioned authorities are a number of inappropriate interpretations, as when the translator renders “logos” almost always as “sermo mentalis” (mental discourse),

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote271" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote271); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote271\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
whereas, in conformity with the Latin usage, it should have been more appropriately rendered:verbum” (word).And “hypostasis” he translates as “essential person”,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote272" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote272); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote272\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
and following this interpretation he is forced at times to use unfortunate phrases as when he says: “Deus Trinipostatos” (God-tri-postatic), that is, tri-personal by essence.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote273" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote273); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote273\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
Now it is absolutely wrong to say God is triune by essence. It would have been enough to render “hypostasis” as “person”; for we so use the term person in the profession of faith where the Greeks use the term hypostasis, as Augustine says,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote274" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote274); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote274\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
even though the manner of signifying of each term is not identical.

He also introduces certain praises of the holy Fathers which raise them above the level of mere men; he calls some of them “fathers of the faith”,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote275" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote275); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote275\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
something exclusive to Christ alone, from whom according to the Apostle in Hebrews 2:3 faith takes its origin. Others, however, may be called teachers or expositors of the faith, but not its fathers.

He also cites at the beginning of this book certain texts of Holy Scripture which of themselves do not expressly prove the procession of the Holy Spirit from the Son, such as: the Spirit of the Lord was hovering over the waters (Gen. 1:2);

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote276" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote276); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote276\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
or: I am the God of Abraham, etc. (Exodus 3:6).

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote277" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote277); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote277\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

He also uses certain turns of phrase which he finds in texts of the holy Fathers, which, as noted above,

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote278" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote278); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote278\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
are in the statements of the Fathers to be interpreted reverently rather than be cited by others; for instance that there is in God a first, second, third;

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote279" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote279); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote279\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
a cause and a caused.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote280" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote280); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote280\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

In his own explanations

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote281" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote281); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote281\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }
as well he uses words improperly and inappropriately, as when he says that the Son has a kind of twin property, subalternated so to speak in terms of predication. He is first to the Father as subject to predicate and then to the Holy Spirit as predicate to subject, which is absolutely mistaken.

He likewise says that, in Greek, image means the same as second entity, an absolutely inept phrase. He also says that the word image does not imply origin, which contradicts what Augustine says in the book on the 83 questions.

if(bInlineFloats) { document.write('<span id="WPFootnote282" class="WPFloatStyle">'); document.write(WPFootnote282); document.write('<br><a href="javascript:WPHide(\'WPFootnote282\')">Close<\/a>'); document.write('<\/span>'); }

There are perhaps other points in the aforesaid book which either could be considered doubtful and would need clarification, or which could be useful in affirming the faith. But almost all of them can be reduced, I believe, to the points set forth above.
