# Chapter 1267

1 We warn brothers, especially young priests, to be intent on study more zealously than usual, studying the Bible, the Sentences, histories, the writings of saints and the Summa of cases. Lectors should continue their teaching, and brothers should eagerly go over their lessons. Those who are negligent in this should be sternly punished by the priors.

2 Also we desire and command the brothers not to approach the Roman curia at all without special permission of the prior provincial or his vicar.

3 Also, we desire and command that no one, except their prelates, should dare open letters sent by any brother.

4 Also, we forbid brothers, when they are transferred from one convent to another, to take with them toilet stools (?), slippers and carpets, or to have these brought by others.

5 Also, when it is said around the province that some brothers make books for sale and thus are occupied in their own writing and withdraw themselves from the common services, we desire and command priors never to permit this in their convents. Books or notebooks which they wrote without the permission of the prior provincial they should not be allowed to sell.

6 Also, because disturbances often arise because of brothers who go out and leave their keys where the priors do not know or, what is worse, sometimes take the keys out of the house with them, we desire and ordain that every prior should appoint two brothers of his convent who ordinarily stay at home to receive the keys of the other brothers who go out.

7 The socius of the provincial for the general chapter is br. Prohinus.

8 The next provincial chapter will be at Pisa near the feast of Pentecost. Brothers should not come before three days to the vigil of Pentecost.

9 We admonish the brothers to speak well of the Lord Pope and King Charles.
