# Chapter 1273

1 Since our Order is known to need study very much for the salvation of souls and the office of preaching, we desire and command lectors to continue their lectures until te feast of John the Baptist. They should give two lectures in theology and not be given to short classes, and we desire priors to compel them in this matter.

2 Also, we warn and command lectors to show proper reverence to their priors and try to keep peace with the priors and convents. Otherwise they should be severely punished.

3 Also, we warn and command priors to treat the lectors kindly and courteously, and provide food, clothing, cells and assistants for them according to the ability of the convent and the need of their work and the good name of the Order.

4 Also, we desire and command lectors to continue their teaching as said above. During vacation time they should not be enlisted for the week[ly office] of the dead or of the living, or for assignments in choir or the refectory, nor should the be sent out to beg against their will, nor should they be compelled to go to choir or to funerals, unless there be a special need or reason.

5 Also, we warn priors and brothers to go to class along with their books, and not stay away unless a reasonable cause demands it. Those who notoriously contravene this should be punished.

Also, we warn and command priors not to be quick and easy in giving precepts, so as to avoid scandalizing the brothers and endangering souls.

Also, since many complaints are made against priors that the sick are served negligently, we desire and command that henceforth any found negligent should be severely punished by the visitators.

8 Also, we desire and command that the books which students have produced with the money the province provides, should be handed over to the prior provincial after their death, so that they can be distributed to other students. The students should inscribe in these books that they were produced with the money of the province.

9 Also we forbid brothers to hide the faults of priors or the brothers from the provincial or his vicars or the visitators, reserving them to the provincial chapter. Otherwise, their accusatons will not be entertained by the chapter and will be treated as null. Yet if the complainants see that the prior provincial or his vicar or the visitator does not adequately correct the brothers’ negligence, they should report this to the provincial chapter.

10 Also, we warn that the constitution concerning cheapness of clothing should be very carefully observed, and that their sandals have no fancy buckles, nor should they wear handkerchiefs in the house or in town.

Also we warn priors not to hold money, and that an account be frequently made to the officials in the presence of the older brothers.

12 Also, we prohibit brothers who stay with bishops from being elected as socii to priors.

13 Also, we command priors and sub-priors to try to have correct constitutions in their convents. Those who are found after Easter not to have them should be very severely punished by the visitators. We command the same regarding those who do not have the acts of the general and provincial chapters in a single volume, which they should have read frequently in the convents.

14 We strictly forbid all brothers from consulting lawyers concerning conventual affairs without the advice and consent of the priors. Any who do otherwise should be severely punished.

Also, we warn priest brothers to celebrate frequently and, when some reason impedes them from celebrating Mass, to try to observe most carefully the admonition previously made to brothers who are not priests confess twice a week.

16 We establish a convent at Castellum, were we assign br. Guarnerius of Florence as conventual prior, br. James Raynutius as conventual lector, etc.

17 We make preachers general bros. Vincent of Luca, Humbert of Florence, Hugo of Ubertino, John of Viterbo, Bandinus of Amelia, Parisius of Rome and Thomas of Fuscia.

18 We approve the sentences of the judges.

19 The socius of the prior provincial at the general chapter is br. Guarnerius of Florence.

20 The next provincial chapter we assign to Naples on the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, with the proviso that on the vigil the diffinitors are elected, and we desire the brothers not to come before three days to the chapter, except those who are coming be sea.
