# Chapter 1263

1 We strictly forbid any brother from involving himself in the affairs of a civic or military faction or in a confederation of towns or military encampments. If any do so, we strictly command the priors, their vicars and the visitators to punish them severely, and also report this misdemeanor to the prior provincial and the diffinitors of the next chapter.

2 Also, we warn the brothers, when they speak with seculars, not to be boastful in any way, by word or sign. Any found to do so should be harshly punished.

3 Also, we warn all brothers, both inside and outside the house, to take care to hear Mass every day where they can easily do so. Priest brothers should take care to celebrate Mass frequently. Those who are found negligent in this should be corrected with a suitable penance.

4 Also, we warn priors to see that lay brothers are busy in cooking and in other jobs, so that they do not idle away their time.

5 Also, we warn brothers to act respectfully towards prelates and other ecclesiastical persons, and never talk bad about them.

6 Also, we command all priors not to have brothers ordained priests who are too young or not mature in morals.

7 Also, we warn brothers not to play hand game [handball?]. Priors should harshly correct those they find doing so.

8 Also, we warn priors and sub-priors to provide instruction in chant for young brothers who have an ability for this, and see that both young and other brothers attend class and go over their lessons. They should compel them to stay in their cells. They should severely correct those who idle their time away, and keep occupied with study those who spend more time than others in other jobs and offices.

9 Also, we warn the brothers not to wear fancy sandal buckles and buckle paraphanalia.

10 Also, we warn priors not to be easy in giving permission to the brothers to run around town, unless necessity or usefulness demands it.

11 Also we desire and command the brothers not to have closed footware made that look like socks; nor should they carry them outside the house. Those who have such must remove them within eight days, or else be deprived of them.

12 Also, we desire that priors who are Preachers General, when signing letters, should not use their own seals, but that of the priory. Other brothers who are not Preachers General and have seals with their own name should hand them over to their priors within eight days.

13 We ordain that the prior of Saint Sixtus holds the last place among the priors of the Province.

14 The master-electors are br. John, prior of Florence, and br. Lawrence of Todi.

15 The diffinitor of the general chapter is br. Lawrence of Todi, and his socius is br. John of Viterbo, prior of Florence. The socius of the prior provincial is br. Paul of Figino.

16 We assign the next provincial chapter to Viterbo on the feast of St. Michael, with the proviso that on the vigil the diffinitors are elected.
