# Chapter 1266

1 Since the illustrious king Charles has always had a special love for our Order and has been its protector everywhere, we warn and command all brothers to respect his honour everywhere and always in their words and deeds. Anyone doing the contrary should be severely punished by the priors and visitators, and also denounced in writing to the provincial chapter.

2 Also, we warn priors not to give insolent brothers too much liberty under the guise of begging.

3 Also, we desire and command the brothers not to sell sermons and notebooks outside the order, nor make provision for lay people to copy them.

4 Also we desire and command priors not to distribute the books of the deceased, nor to give them to brothers without the advise of the priests, especially books of some value.

5 Also, we charge all priors and their vicars not to allow the cells of any brother be closed, and open any that are closed, so that the brothers sitting there can be seen by those passing by. Priors who do not do so by a month after getting this injunction should fast for three days on bread and water, and afterwards should be compelled by the visitators to comply.

6 Also, we desire that the constitution on not receiving any deposits at all be better observed, and that any deposits that have been received should be given back as soon as possible, if they can be returned without grave scandal to the owners.

7 Also we warn priors not to summon priests about insignificant matters; and if they are to be called for any serious matters, the priors should go along with the counsel not of the majority but of the discrete brothers.

Also, we wish and command that the money of lay brothers, since they don’t need it to have books made, should be taken from them, except for what they need for clothing.

9 Also, we desire that the books of deceased brothers which are given to others for their use should be marked as belonging to the convents of the brothers to whom the books are given.

Also, we strictly command all brothers who have some medical knowledge not to involve themselves at all in advising the brothers.

11 The diffinitor for the general chapter is br. Hugo of Siena, and his socius is br. Synabald of Alma.

We strictly prohibit the Roman brothers not to alienate any newly accepted place in Rome.
