# Chapter 1265

1 We desire and command brothers not to visit monasteries of nuns not entrusted to the care of theOrder, and not to hear their confessions at any time and not to administer to them any church sacraments. Those who do otherwise should be severely punished.

Also, we prohibit brothers who are notably young from being promoted to sacred orders, especially the priesthood.

Also, we prohibit brothers from sitting and talking with women in the church without wearing cappas.

4 Also we command brothers not to involve themselves at all in affairs of towns, military factions and parties. Those who are found guilty of this should be severly punished by the priors and visitators and their misdemeanor should also be reported to the provincial chapter.

5 Also, we desire that a prayer often be said in Mass for the Lord Pope, especially in the place the curia is located.

6 Also, we desire young priests, wherever and whenever necessary, to be assigned to all the ministerial functions of the altar.

7 Also, we desire priors to take diligent care in providing for lectors, and to see that they have an assistant and other necessary things.

8 Also, we desire that the ordination make in a previous provincial chapter concerning study be diligently observed.

9 Also, we desire that the warning made in the general chapter preventing lectors from being elected priors be strictly observed, and that the prior provincial should never dispense from this.

The diffinitor for the general chapter is br. Bonaspes, prior of Perugia. His socius is br. Benvenuto of Serezana.

11 The next provincial chapter we assign to Todi on the feast of blessed Dominica, with the diffinitors to be elected on the vigil. Other brothers hould not come there before three days to the vigil. But we allow the prior provincial and his vicar to change the time and place of the chapter if they think it is needed.

12 We enjoin br. Thomas Aquinas, for the forgiveness of his sins, to run a studium at Rome, and we desire that the brothers who are with him for studies should be provided with necessary clothing by their convents of origin. If those students are found negligent in study, we give br. Thomas the authority to send them back to their convents.

13 The Convent of Pisa will pay 26 Tours-pounds for the students who are at Paris.
