# Chapter 1272

1 We wish and command priors and their representatives to appoint trustworthy and discrete brothers to the reception and the sacristy, who can kindly and charitably receive those who come and carefully keep the keys of the doors.

2 Also, we strictly forbid any clothing allowance to be given to any brother from the goods of the convent, but priors and their representatives should have cloth bought and provide needy brothers according to the goodness of the Order with suitable clothing as resources allow.

3 Also, we very strictly forbid all priors and their representatives from daring to alienate books and other goods of the convent without the express consent of the convent. And the price received from books should not be spent for anything except for books.

4 Also, we desire and command that theconstitution on not carrying money should be better observed.

5 We enjoin the prior of Viterbo to spend the money he received from selling Avicenna on acquiring useful books.

6 The general studium of theology, including its location, personnel and number of students, we commit fully to br. Thomas of Aquinas.

7 We establish a studium of arts in the convent of Pisa, where br. Ricculdus of Florence will teach, and we depute everything concerning this to him.

8 Yet we desire and command that the convents and places from whose preaching area the students in arts and theology originate should be held to provide for their clothing.

9 The diffinitor of the general chapter is br. Eufranon; his socius is br. Salvus de Barga.

10 We designate the limits of the preaching area of the convents of Siena, Città Vecchia, Todi, and Narni as is fully laid out in the schedule marked with our seal.

11 We appoint visitators etc.

12 We enjoin all brothers who are assigned by the present ordination to convents or houses to go to the convents or houses to which they are assigned within 15 days from receiving this ordination.

13 The next provincial chapter we assign to Rome on the feast of Saint Michael, with the diffinitors to be elected on the vigil. We allow the prior provincial or his vicar to change the time and place of the chapter if they think best. But we wish the brothers not to go to the place of the chapter before three days to the vigil.
