# Chapter 1261

1 Since our Order grew in numbers and strength through wisdom and laudable behaviour, we desire and warn our brothers, both priors and others, to devote more time to wisdom and study, and avoid all familiarity and too much talking with women. Visitators who find brothers excessive in this should harshly correct and admonish them, and still be sure to report them to the prior provincial.

2 Also, we warn priors and their vicars to take very good care of the sick, and brothers should not present difficulties in serving the sick.

3 Also, we warn and desire brothers not to visit the offices of government officials except for important, difficult and pious causes.

4 Also, we warn against sending brothers to preach or take up collections outside the limits of their convents.

5 Also, we forbid all lay brothers from wearing a *Pater Noster* made of amber or coral. If any dare wear these, the priors should confiscate them.

6 Also, we warn that the ordinations circulated by the prior provincial throughout the province should be very carefully observed. Also the letters of the Master sent this year, as well as the provincial’s ordinations, should be read in common to the brothers every two months.

7 Also, to help the diffinitors of the provincial chapter to finish more quickly, we warn the socii of the priors to be sure to sign the petitions, proclamations and other letters.

8 We assign the next provincial chapter to Perugia on the Octave

9 The socius of the prior provincial to the general chapter is br. Hidebrand, prior of Lucca.
