# Lecture 10 — Refutation of these opinions.

These views involve impossibilities, some of which are common to all of them, while others are peculiar to some only.  

> This is the case, first, with those who say that the comet is one of the planets. For all the planets appear in the circle of the zodiac, whereas many comets have been seen outside that circle. Again more comets than one have often appeared simultaneously.

> Besides, if their tail is due to reflection, as Aeschylus and Hippocrates say, this planet ought sometimes to be visible without a tail since, as they it does not possess a tail in every place in which it appears. But, as a matter of fact, no planet has been observed besides the five. And all of them are often visible above the horizon together at the same time. Further, comets are often found to appear, as well when all the planets are visible as when some are not, but are obscured by the neighborhood of the sun.

> Moreover the statement that a comet only appears in the north, with the sun at the summer solstice, is not true either. The great comet which appeared at the time of the earthquake in Achaea and the tidal wave rose due west; and many have been known to appear in the south.

> Again in the archonship of Euclees, son of Molon, at Athens there appeared a comet in the north in the month Gamelion, the sun being about the winter solstice. Yet they themselves admit that reflection over so great a space is an impossibility.

> An objection that tells equally against those who hold this theory and those who say that comets are a coalescence of the planets is, first, the fact that some of the fixed stars too get a tail. For this we must not only accept the authority of the Egyptians who assert it, but we have ourselves observed the fact. For a star in the thigh of the Dog had a tail, though a faint one. If you fixed your sight on it its light was dim, but if you just glanced at it, it appeared brighter.

> Besides, all the comets that have been seen in our day have vanished without setting, gradually fading away above the horizon; and they have not left behind them either one or more stars. For instance the great comet we mentioned before appeared to the west in winter in frosty weather when the sky was clear, in the archonship of Asteius. On the first day it set before the sun and was then not seen. On the next day it was seen, being ever so little behind the sun and immediately setting. But its light extended over a third part of the sky like a leap, so that people called it a 'path'. This comet receded as far as Orion's belt and there dissolved. Democritus however, insists upon the truth of his view and affirms that certain stars have been seen when comets dissolve. But on his theory this ought not to occur occasionally but always.

> Besides, the Egyptians affirm that conjunctions of the planets with one another, and with the fixed stars, take place, and we have ourselves observed Jupiter coinciding with one of the stars in the Twins and hiding it, and yet no comet was formed.

> Further, we can also give a rational proof of our point. It is true that some stars seem to be bigger than others, yet each one by itself looks indivisible. Consequently, just as, if they really had been indivisible, their conjunction could not have created any greater magnitude, so now that they are not in fact indivisible but look as if they were, their conjunction will not make them look any bigger.

> Enough has been said, without further argument, to show that the causes brought forward to explain comets are false.

> **59**. Having presented the opinions, he now disproves them.

First, he declares how they are to be disproved and says that he intends to present certain facts against all the opinions as a group, and certain facts against one or other of them in particular.  

second at ***this is the case, first,***(343a22), he disputes against the opinions presented.  

First, against the second one, which was that of the Pythagoreans;  

second, against the third, which was Hippocrates', at ***besides, if their tail is due to reflection*** (343a26);  

third, against the first, which was that of Democritus and Anaxagoras, at ***an objection that tells equally*** (343b8).  

**60**. As to the first he gives two arguments:  

the first of which is that all the wandering stars are ***left behind*** (343a22), i.e., move as though being left behind, as already explained, in the "circle of animals called the "Zodiac"; on the other hand, many comets are found outside this circle. Therefore, not all comets are wandering stars.  

The second argument is this: more comets than one have often been seen together; hence a comet is not one of the wandering stars.  

The first of these arguments is against these opinions together; the second is specifically against the second and third opinions.  

**61**. Then when he says, ***besides, if their tail is due to reflection*** (343a26), he disproves the opinion of Hippocrates with three arguments.  

As to the first of these he says that if a planet has a tail because of the reflection of the sight, as Hippocrates said, then it would have occasionally to appear without a tail. This is because it does not everywhere have a tail, as was said, but only when it is outside the tropics, receding to the north—for it is plain that it "falls behind" in other places as though receding from the sun; consequently it must sometimes appear without a tail. But no star is seen wandering without a tail other than the above-mentioned five. But occasionally all five are visible above the horizon at the same time; and when all are above the horizon, or some appear above and some are with the sun, comets nevertheless appear. Hence it is plain that a comet is not always one of the five wandering stars. And there is no other without a tail than these [five]. Therefore a comet is not a wandering star, which on occasion appears with a tail—which would have to be the case, if it did not possess a tail of itself but from being in some determined place, as they claim.  

**62**. He gives the second argument at ***moreover the statement*** (343a35), and says that it is not true to say that a comet occurs only in the region toward the north with the additional observation of the sun at the summer tropics [i.e., summer solstice], as though nearer to the comet. For the great comet which appeared at the time of the great earthquake and tidal wave in Achaia arose from the western equator; so it is plain that it occurred within the "tropics." Moreover, many have appeared in the south. It is therefore false to say that they occur only toward the north.  

**63**. He gives a third argument at ***again*** (343b4), and says that in the time of a certain Athenian ruler, a comet star was formed when the sun was near the winter tropics [solstice], i.e., near Capricorn and this was in the month of ***Gamelion***, i.e., December or January. Now as they themselves admit, it seems impossible for such a long reflection from our vision to the sun to occur, considering the distance to the sun then prevailing at night and considering the size of the section of the circle below the horizon. Therefore, their claim that a comet does not appear unless the sun is near the summer tropic [solstice] is false.  

**64**. Then when he says, ***an objection that tells equally*** (343b8), he disproves the first opinion with four arguments.  

The first of these is against all the aforesaid opinions that claim the comets are wandering stars—for even certain stars that are not wandering receive a tail. And this is to be believed not only on the authority of certain Egyptians devoted to mathematics, but Aristotle himself says that he saw one of the stars in the constellation of the Dog, in the thigh, to be exact, with a tail, although it was faint: this was evidenced by the fact that when you gazed at it intently, the light of the tail grew dim, but when one glanced at the star not too intensely but more moderately, more of the tail's light appeared.  

**65**. In the second argument at ***besides, all*** (343b14), he says that all the comets that were seen in his time disappeared in a region above the horizon ***without setting***, i.e., without approaching the sun. For stars are said to "set" when they enter into the sun's rays; but the comets of his time disappeared without approaching the sun, still being above the horizon far from the sun. And they disappeared as if gradually wasting away without leaving behind the body of one star or of several. For the great star previously described, which was at the time of the earthquake in Achaia, in the Athenian archonship of Astius, appeared in winter during the evening when it was frosty and clear: on the first day, not the star, but only its tail, appeared, as though setting before the sun; but on the second day it was as visible as conditions permitted, because for a short time it remained behind the sun and then immediately set; but the light of that comet spread over a third part of the heaven which burst into light not gradually but all at once, so that the upward ascent of the light was called the comet's path; it did indeed ascend, receding from the sun toward the stars called "Orion's belt," where it was dissolved, not by approaching the sun, but by receding farther and farther from it.  

This is also an argument against all the foregoing opinions that say a comet is one or more of the wandering stars. Consequently, it is plain from this argument that what Democritus said in support of his opinion was insufficient. For he said that when comets dissolved, there sometimes appeared certain remaining stars. This is an insufficient explanation because it devolved on him to prove that stars always, and not just occasionally, remained when comets were dissolved—which has been seen to be false from what has been said.  

**66**. He gives a third argument at ***besides, the Egyptians*** (343b32), which is this: Egyptians claim that the conjunctions of the planets with one another and with certain fixed stars take place. And he says that he himself saw Jupiter conjoin with a star in Gemini and make it invisible. Yet no comet was formed, as should have according to the opinion of Democritus and Anaxagoras.  

**67**. The fourth argument at ***further, we can also give a rational proof*** (343b34) is this: although some stars seem to be larger and some smaller when compared to one another, yet each considered by itself appears to be as though a point and indivisible. But if they were in very truth indivisible, they could not produce a larger magnitude by merely touching one another, as was proved in *Physics* VI. Therefore, when they seem to be indivisibles, although they are not, they should not, when in conjunction, seem larger as far as their apparent size is concerned. Consequently, from the conjunction of stars a tail should not be visible as though produced by an increase of light. (These last two arguments are properly against Democritus' opinion).  

Finally, he summarizes what has been said—as is had in text.
