# Lecture 1 — Greeting

^1:1^ Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timothy, a brother: [n. 3]  

> ^1:2^ To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ Jesus who are at Colossa. [n. 6]

> ^1:3^ Grace be to you and peace, from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ. [n. 7] We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you. [n. 8]

> **3**. This letter is divided into its greeting and its message, at ***grace be to you***.

First, the persons sending the letter are mentioned;  

then, the ones to whom it is sent, at ***to the saints and faithful***;  

and third, the good things desired for the latter, at ***grace be to you***.  

As to the first,  

the principal sender is mentioned;  

and second, his companion, at ***and Timothy***.  

**4**. The principal sender of this letter is first identified by his name, ***Paul***, that is, one who is humble, for it is such persons who receive wisdom: *you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to babes* (Matt 11:25), and so Paul can teach this wisdom.  

Second, the sender is described by his office, namely, ***an apostle***, that is, one who is sent, to bring salvation to the faithful: *set apart for me Saul and Barnabas for the work to which I have called them* (Acts 13:2); *as the Father has sent me, even so I send you* (John 20:21). He is not the apostle of just anyone, but ***of Jesus Christ***, whose glory he seeks, and not his own: *for what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, with ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake* (2 Cor 4:5).  

But at times some reach their office because God is angry because of a people’s sins: *who makes a man who is a hypocrite to reign for the sins of the people* (Job 34:30); *I have given you kings in my anger* (Hos 13:11). And so Paul says that he has his office ***by the will of God***, that is, by his pleasure: *I will give you shepherds after my own heart, who will feed you with knowledge and understanding* (Jer 3:15).  

**5**. The other person to send this letter is ***Timothy, a brother***, so that there may be two or three witnesses (Deut 17:6). *A brother helped is like a strong city* (Prov 18:19).  

**6**. The persons to whom this letter is sent are ***the saints and faithful brethren***. The greater ones are called ***saints***: *let us serve him in holiness and righteousness* (Luke 1:75); and the lesser ones are referred to as the ***faithful***, who have at least kept the true faith, because *without faith it is impossible to please God* (Heb 11:6).  

Or we could say, ***to the saints***, that is, to those sanctified by baptism,** *and faithful brethren***, that is, those who have remained in the faith they accepted: *a faithful man will be much praised* (Prov 28:20).  

**7**. Then he mentions the good things he wishes them to have: that is, ***grace***, which is the source of every good: *justified by his grace as a gift* (Rom 3:24); ***and peace***, which is the last of all goods: *he makes peace in your borders* (Ps 147:14). As a consequence, he wishes them all the goods that lie between these two.  

And he says ***from God***: *the Lord will give grace and glory* (Ps 84:11). From the ***Father of our Lord Jesus Christ***, that is, the Father of Christ by nature, and ***our Father*** by grace; and ***from the Lord Jesus Christ***. And so, from ***our Father***, that is, God in his Trinity, and ***from the Lord Jesus Christ***, considering the nature God assumed.
