# 1 Chronicles 8

*The posterity of Benjamin is further declared down to Saul. His issue.*

**1** Now Benjamin begot Bale his firstborn, Asbel the second, Ahara the third,

**2** Nohaa the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.

**3** And the sons of Bale were Addar, and Gera, and Abiud,

**4** And Abisue, and Naaman, and Ahoe,

**5** And Gera, and Sephuphan, and Huram.

**6** These are the sons of Abed, heads of families that dwelt in Gabaa, who were removed into Manahath.

**7** And Naaman, and Achia, and Gera he removed them, and begot Oza, and Ahiud.

**8** And Saharim begot in the land of Moab, after he sent away Husim and Bara his wives.

**9** And he begot of Hodes his wife Jobab, and Sebia, and Mosa, and Molchom,

**10** And Jehus and Sechia, and Marma. These were his sons heads of their families.

**11** And Mehusim begot Abitob, and Elphaal.

**12** And the sons of Elphaal were Heber, and Misaam, and Samad: who built Ono, and Lod, and its daughters.

**13** And Baria, and Sama were heads of their kindreds that dwelt in Aialon: these drove away the inhabitants of Geth.

**14** And Ahio, and Sesac, and Jerimoth,

**15** And Zabadia, and Arod, and Heder,

**16** And Michael, and Jespha, and Joha, the sons of Baria.

**17** And Zabadia, and Mosollam, Hezeci, and Heber,

**18** And Jesamari, and Jezlia, and Jobab, sons of Elphaal,

**19** And Jacim, and Zechri, and Zabdi,

**20** And Elioenai, and Selethai, and Elial,

**21** And Adaia, and Baraia, and Samareth, the sons of Semei.

**22** And Jespham, and Heber, and Eliel,

**23** And Abdon, and Zechri, and Hanan,

**24** And Hanania, and Elam, and Anathothia.

**25** And Jephdaia, and Phanuel the sons of Sesac.

**26** And Samsari, and Sohoria and Otholia,

**27** And Jersia, and Elia, and Zechri, the sons of Jeroham.

**28** These were the chief fathers, and heads of their families who dwelt in Jerusalem.

**29** And at Gabaon dwelt Abigabaon, and the name of his wife was Maacha:

**30** And his firstborn son Abdon, and Sur, and Cis, and Baal, and Nadab,

**31** And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher, and Macelloth:

**32** And Macelloth begot Samaa: and they dwelt over against their brethren in Jerusalem with their brethren.

**33** And Ner begot Cis and Cis begot Saul. And Saul begot Jonathan and Melchisua, and Abinadab, and Esbaal. *(**Esbaal...** Alias Isboseth.)*

**34** And the son of Jonathan was Meribbaal: and Meribbaal begot Micha. *(**Meribbaal...** Alias Miphiboseth. 2 Samuel 4:4.)*

**35** And the sons of Micha were Phithon, and Melech, and Tharaa, and Ahaz.

**36** And Ahaz begot Joada: and Joada begot Alamath, and Azmoth, and Zamri: and Zamri begot Mosa,

**37** And Mosa begot Banaa, whose son was Rapha, of whom was born Elasa, who begot Asel.

**38** And Asel had six sons whose names were Ezricam, Bochru, Ismahel, Saris, Obdia, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Asel.

**39** And the sons of Esec, his brother, were Ulam the firstborn, and Jehus the second, and Eliphalet the third.

**40** And the sons of Ulam were most valiant men, and archers of great strength: and they had many sons and grandsons, even to a hundred and fifty. All these were children of Benjamin.
