# 1 Timothy 4

*He warns him against heretics, and exhorts him to the exercise of piety.*

**1** Now the Spirit manifestly saith that in the last times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits of error and doctrines of devils,

**2** Speaking lies in hypocrisy and having their conscience seared,

**3** Forbidding to marry, to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving by the faithful and by them that have known the truth. *(**Forbidding to marry, to abstain from meats...**. He speaks of the Gnostics, the Marcionites, the Encratites, the Manicheans, and other ancient heretics, who absolutely condemned marriage, and the use of all kind of meat; because they pretended that all flesh was from an evil principle. Whereas the church of God, so far from condemning marriage, holds it a holy sacrament; and forbids it to none but such as by vow have chosen the better part: and prohibits not the use of any meats whatsoever in proper times and seasons; though she does not judge all kind of diet proper for days of fasting and penance.)*

**4** For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected that is received with thanksgiving:

**5** For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.

**6** These things proposing to the brethren, thou shalt be a good minister of Christ Jesus, nourished up in the words of faith and of the good doctrine which thou hast attained unto.

**7** But avoid foolish and old wives fables: and exercise thyself unto godliness.

**8** For bodily exercise is profitable to little: but godliness is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is and of that which is to come.

**9** A faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation.

**10** For therefore we labour and are reviled, because we hope in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, especially of the faithful.

**11** These things command and teach:

**12** Let no man despise thy youth: but be thou an example of the faithful, in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in chastity.

**13** Till I come, attend unto reading, to exhortation and to doctrine.

**14** Neglect not the grace that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the priesthood.

**15** Meditate upon these things, be wholly in these things: that thy profiting may be manifest to all.

**16** Take heed to thyself and to doctrine: be earnest in them. For in doing this thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee.
