# 1 Timothy 2

*Prayers are to be said for all men, because God wills the salvation of all. Women are not to teach.*

**1** I desire therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions and thanksgivings be made for all men:

**2** For kings and for all that are in high station: that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all piety and chastity.

**3** For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour,

**4** Who will have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.

**5** For there is one God: and one mediator of God and men, the man Christ Jesus: *(**One mediator...** Christ is the one and only mediator of redemption, who gave himself, as the apostle writes in the following verse.)*

**6** Who gave himself a redemption for all, a testimony in due times, *(**A redemption for all...** He is also the only mediator, who stands in need of no other to recommend his petitions to the Father. But this is not against our seeking the prayers and intercession, as well of the faithful upon earth, as of the saints and angels in heaven, for obtaining mercy, grace, and salvation, through Jesus Christ. As St. Paul himself often desired the help of the prayers of the faithful, without any injury to the mediatorship of Jesus Christ.)*

**7** Whereunto I am appointed a preacher and an apostle (I say the truth, I lie not), a doctor of the Gentiles in faith and truth.

**8** I will therefore that men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands, without anger and contention.

**9** In like manner, women also in decent apparel: adorning themselves with modesty and sobriety, not with plaited hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly attire:

**10** But, as it becometh women professing godliness, with good works.

**11** Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.

**12** But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to use authority over the man: but to be in silence.

**13** For Adam was first formed; then Eve.

**14** And Adam was not seduced; but the woman, being seduced, was in the transgression.

**15** Yet she shall be saved through child bearing; if she continue in faith and love and sanctification with sobriety.
