# 2 Timothy 3

*The character of heretics of latter days. He exhorts Timothy to constancy. Of the great profit of the knowledge of the scriptures.*

**1** Know also this, that in the last days shall come dangerous times.

**2** Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, haughty, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, wicked,

**3** Without affection, without peace, slanderers, incontinent, unmerciful, without kindness,

**4** Traitors, stubborn, puffed up, and lovers of pleasure more than of God:

**5** Having an appearance indeed of godliness but denying the power thereof. Now these avoid.

**6** For of these sort are they who creep into houses and lead captive silly women laden with sins, who are led away with divers desires:

**7** Ever learning, and never attaining to the knowledge of the truth.

**8** Now as Jannes and Mambres resisted Moses, so these also resist the truth, men corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the faith. *(**Jannes and Mambres...** The magicians of king Pharao.)*

**9** But they shall proceed no farther: for their folly shall be manifest to all men, as theirs also was.

**10** But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, patience,

**11** Persecutions, afflictions: such as came upon me at Antioch, at Iconium and at Lystra: what persecutions I endured, and out of them all the Lord delivered me.

**12** And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

**13** But evil men and seducers shall grow worse and worse: erring, and driving into error,

**14** But continue thou in those things which thou hast learned and which have been committed to thee. Knowing of whom thou hast learned them:

**15** And because from thy infancy thou hast known the holy scriptures which can instruct thee to salvation by the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

**16** All scripture, inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct in justice: *(**All scripture,...** Every part of divine scripture is certainly profitable for all these ends. But, if we would have the whole rule of Christian faith and practice, we must not be content with those Scriptures, which Timothy knew from his infancy, that is, with the Old Testament alone: nor yet with the New Testament, without taking along with it the traditions of the apostles, and the interpretation of the church, to which the apostles delivered both the book, and the true meaning of it.)*

**17** That the man of God may be perfect, furnished to every good work.
