# Isaiah 21

*The destruction of Babylon by the Medes and Persians: a prophecy against the Edomites and the Arabians.*

**1** The burden of the desert of the sea.

> As whirlwinds come from the south, it cometh from the desert from a terrible land. *(**The desert of the sea...** So Babylon is here called, because from a city as full of people as the sea is with water, it was become a desert.)*
> **2** A grievous vision is told me: he that is unfaithful dealeth unfaithfully: and he that is a spoiler, spoileth. Go up, O Elam, besiege, O Mede: I have made all the mourning thereof to cease. *(**O Elam...** That is, O Persia.)*
> **3** Therefore are my loins filled with pain, anguish hath taken hold of me, as the anguish of a woman in labour: I fell down at the hearing of it, I was troubled at the seeing of it.
> **4** My heart failed, darkness amazed me: Babylon my beloved is become a wonder to me.
> **5** Prepare the table, behold in the watchtower them that eat and drink: arise, ye princes, take up the shield.
> **6** For thus hath the Lord said to me: Go, and set a watchman: and whatsoever he shall see, let him tell.
> **7** And he saw a chariot with two horsemen, a rider upon an ass, and a rider upon a camel: and he beheld them diligently with much heed. *(**A rider upon an ass, etc...** These two riders are the kings of the Persians and Medes.)*
> **8** And a lion cried out: I am upon the watchtower of the Lord, standing continually by day: and I am upon my ward, standing whole nights. *(**And a lion cried out...** That is, I Isaiah seeing the approaching ruin of Babylon, have cried out as a lion roaring.)*
> **9** Behold this man cometh, the rider upon the chariot with two horsemen, and he answered, and said: Babylon is fallen, she is fallen, and all the graven gods thereof are broken unto the ground.
> **10** O my thrashing, and the children of my floor, that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, I have declared unto you.

**11** The burden of Duma.

> Calleth to me out of Seir: Watchman, what of the night? watchman, what of the night? *(**Duma...** That is, Idumea, or Edom.)*
> **12** The watchman said: The morning cometh, also the night: if you seek, seek: return, come.

**13** The burden in Arabia.

> In the forest at evening you shall sleep, in the paths of Dedanim.
> **14** Meeting the thirsty bring him water, you that inhabit the land of the south, meet with bread him that fleeth.
> **15** For they are fled from before the swords, from the sword that hung over them, from the bent bow, from the face of a grievous battle.
> **16** For thus saith the Lord to me: Within a year, according to the years of a hireling, all the glory of Cedar shall be taken away. *(**Cedar...** Arabia.)*
> **17** And the residue of the number of strong archers of the children of Cedar shall be diminished: for the Lord the God of Israel hath spoken it.
