# Job 1

*Job's virtue and riches. Satan by permission from God strips him of all his substance. His patience.*

**1** There was a man in the land of Hus, whose name was Job, and that man was simple and upright, and fearing God, and avoiding evil. *(**Hus...** The land of Hus was a part of Edom; as appears from Lamentations 4:21. Ibid. **Simple...** That is, innocent, sincere, and without guile.)*

**2** And there were born to him seven sons and three daughters.

**3** And his possession was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and a family exceedingly great: and this man was great among all the people of the east.

**4** And his sons went, and made a feast by houses, every one in his day. And sending, they called their three sisters, to eat and drink with them. *(**And made a feast by houses...** That is, each made a feast in his own house and had his day, inviting the others, and their sisters.)*

**5** And when the days of their feasting were gone about, Job sent to them, and sanctified them: and rising up early, offered holocausts for every one of them. For he said: Lest perhaps my sons have sinned, and have blessed God in their hearts. So did Job all days. *(**Blessed...** For greater horror of the very thought of blasphemy, the scripture both here and verse 11, and in 2:5 and 9, uses the word bless to signify its contrary.)*

**6** Now on a certain day, when the sons of God came to stand before the Lord, Satan also was present among them. *(**The sons of God...** The angels. -- Ibid. **Satan also, etc...** This passage represents to us in a figure, accommodated to the ways and understandings of men, (1) The restless endeavours of Satan against the servants of God; (2) That he can do nothing without God's permission; (3) That God doth not permit him to tempt them above their strength: but assists them by his divine grace in such manner, that the vain efforts of the enemy only serve to illustrate their virtue and increase their merit.)*

**7** And the Lord said to him: Whence comest thou? And he answered and said: I have gone round about the earth, and walked through it.

**8** And the Lord said to him: Hast thou considered my servant, Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a simple and upright man, and fearing God, and avoiding evil?

**9** And Satan answering, said: Doth Job fear God in vain?

**10** Hast thou not made a fence for him, and his house, and all his substance round about, blessed the works of his hands, and his possession hath increased on the earth?

**11** But stretch forth thy hand a little, and touch all that he hath, and see if he bless thee not to thy face.

**12** Then the Lord said to Satan: Behold, all that he hath is in thy hand: only put not forth thy hand upon his person. And Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord.

**13** Now upon a certain day, when his sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine, in the house of their eldest brother,

**14** There came a messenger to Job, and said: The oxen were ploughing, and the asses feeding beside them,

**15** And the Sabeans rushed in, and took all away, and slew the servants with the sword; and I alone have escaped to tell thee.

**16** And while he was yet speaking, another came, and said: The fire of God fell from heaven, and striking the sheep and the servants, hath consumed them; and I alone have escaped to tell thee.

**17** And while he also was yet speaking, there came another, and said: The Chaldeans made three troops, and have fallen upon the camels, and taken them; moreover, they have slain the servants with the sword: and I alone have escaped to tell thee.

**18** He was yet speaking, and behold another came in, and said: Thy sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in the house of their eldest brother,

**19** A violent wind came on a sudden from the side of the desert, and shook the four corners of the house, and it fell upon thy children, and they are dead: and I alone have escaped to tell thee.

**20** Then Job rose up, and rent his garments, and having shaven his head, fell down upon the ground, and worshipped,

**21** And said: Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away: as it hath pleased the Lord, so is it done: blessed be the name of the Lord.

**22** In all these things Job sinned not by his lips, nor spoke he any foolish thing against God.
