# Numbers 17

*The priesthood is confirmed to Aaron by the miracle of the blooming of his rod, which is kept for a monument in the tabernacle.*

**1** And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

**2** Speak to the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod by their kindreds, of all the princes of the tribes, twelve rods, and write the name of every man upon his rod.

**3** And the name of Aaron shall be for the tribe of Levi, and one rod shall contain all their families:

**4** And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the covenant before the testimony, where I will speak to thee.

**5** Whomsoever of these I shall choose, his rod shall blossom: and I will make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of Israel, wherewith they murmur against you.

**6** And Moses spoke to the children of Israel: and all the princes gave him rods one for every tribe: and there were twelve rods besides the rod of Aaron.

**7** And when Moses had laid them up before the Lord in the tabernacle of the testimony:

**8** He returned on the following day, and found that the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi, was budded: and that the buds swelling it hid bloomed blossoms, which spreading the leaves, were formed into almonds. *(**The rod of Aaron for the house of Levi, was budded, etc...** This rod of Aaron which thus miraculously brought forth fruit, was a figure of the blessed Virgin conceiving and bringing forth her Son without any prejudice to her virginity.)*

**9** Moses therefore brought out all the rods from before the Lord to all the children of Israel: and they saw, and every one received their rods.

**10** And the Lord said to Moses: Carry back the rod of Aaron into the tabernacle of the testimony, that it may be kept there for a token of the rebellious children of Israel, and that their complaints may cease from me lest they die.

**11** And Moses did as the Lord had commanded.

**12** And the children of Israel said to Moses: Behold we are consumed, we all perish.

**13** Whosoever approacheth to the tabernacle of the Lord, he dieth. Are we all to a man to be utterly destroyed?
