# Psalms 31

*The second penitential psalm.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 32**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 31**.)*

**1** To David himself, understanding.

> Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
> **2** Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath not imputed sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile.
> **3** Because I was silent my bones grew old; whilst I cried out all the day long. *(**Because I was silent, etc...** That is, whilst I kept silence, by concealing, or refusing to confess my sins, thy hand was heavy upon me, etc.)*
> **4** For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: I am turned in my anguish, whilst the thorn is fastened. *(**I am turned, etc...** That is, I turn and roll about in my bed to seek for ease in my pain whilst the thorn of thy justice pierces my flesh, and sticks fast in me. Or, I am turned: that is, I am converted to thee, my God, by being brought to a better understanding by thy chastisements. In the Hebrew it is, my moisture is turned into the droughts of the summer.)*
> **5** I have acknowledged my sin to thee, and my injustice I have not concealed. I said I will confess against my self my injustice to the Lord: and thou hast forgiven the wickedness of my sin.
> **6** For this shall every one that is holy pray to thee in a seasonable time. And yet in a flood of many waters, they shall not come nigh unto him.
> **7** Thou art my refuge from the trouble which hath encompassed me: my joy, deliver me from them that surround me.
> **8** I will give thee understanding, and I will instruct thee in this way, in which thou shalt go: I will fix my eyes upon thee.
> **9** Do not become like the horse and the mule, who have no understanding. With bit and bridle bind fast their jaws, who come not near unto thee.
> **10** Many are the scourges of the sinner, but mercy shall encompass him that hopeth in the Lord.
> **11** Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye just, and glory, all ye right of heart.
