# Psalms 28

*An invitation to glorify God, with a commemoration of his mighty works.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 29**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 28**.)*

**1** A psalm for David, at the finishing of the tabernacle.

> Bring to the Lord, O ye children of God: bring to the Lord the offspring of rams.
> **2** Bring to the Lord glory and honour: bring to the Lord glory to his name: adore ye the Lord in his holy court.
> **3** The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; the God of majesty hath thundered, The Lord is upon many waters.
> **4** The voice of the Lord is in power; the voice of the Lord in magnificence.
> **5** The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars: yea, the Lord shall break the cedars of Libanus.
> **6** And shall reduce them to pieces, as a calf of Libanus, and as the beloved son of unicorns. *(**Shall reduce them to pieces, etc...** In Hebrew, *shall make them to skip like a calf*. The psalmist here describes the effects of thunder (which he calls the voice of the Lord) which sometimes breaks down the tallest and strongest trees; and makes their broken branches skip, etc. All this is to be understood mystically of the powerful voice of God's word in his church; which has broken the pride of the great ones of this world, and brought many of them meekly and joyfully to submit their necks to the sweet yoke of Christ.)*
> **7** The voice of the Lord divideth the flame of fire:
> **8** The voice of the Lord shaketh the desert: and the Lord shall shake the desert of Cades.
> **9** The voice of the Lord prepareth the stags: and he will discover the thick woods: and in his temple all shall speak his glory.
> **10** The Lord maketh the flood to dwell: and the Lord shall sit king for ever. The Lord will give strength to his people: the Lord will bless his people with peace.
