# Psalms 71

*A prophecy of the coming of Christ, and of his kingdom: prefigured by Solomon and his happy reign.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 72**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 71**.)*

**1** A psalm on Solomon.

> **2** Give to the king thy judgment, O God, and to the king's son thy justice: To judge thy people with justice, and thy poor with judgment.
> **3** Let the mountains receive peace for the people: and the hills justice.
> **4** He shall judge the poor of the people, and he shall save the children of the poor: and he shall humble the oppressor.
> **5** And he shall continue with the sun and before the moon, throughout all generations.
> **6** He shall come down like rain upon the fleece; and as showers falling gently upon the earth.
> **7** In his days shall justice spring up, and abundance of peace, till the moon be taken away.
> **8** And he shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.
> **9** Before him the Ethiopians shall fall down: and his enemies shall lick the ground.
> **10** The kings of Tharsis and the islands shall offer presents: the kings of the Arabians and of Saba shall bring gifts:
> **11** And all kings of the earth shall adore him: all nations shall serve him.
> **12** For he shall deliver the poor from the mighty: and the needy that had no helper.
> **13** He shall spare the poor and needy: and he shall save the souls of the poor.
> **14** He shall redeem their souls from usuries and iniquity: and their names shall be honourable in his sight.
> **15** And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Arabia, for him they shall always adore: they shall bless him all the day.
> **16** And there shall be a firmament on the earth on the tops of mountains, above Libanus shall the fruit thereof be exalted: and they of the city shall flourish like the grass of the earth. *(**A firmament on the earth, etc...** This may be understood of the church of Christ, ever firm and visible: and of the flourishing condition of its congregation.)*
> **17** Let his name be blessed for evermore: his name continueth before the sun. And in him shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed: all nations shall magnify him.
> **18** Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who alone doth wonderful things.
> **19** And blessed be the name of his majesty for ever: and the whole earth shall be filled with his majesty. So be it. So be it.

**20** The praises of David, the son of Jesse, are ended. *(**Are ended...** By this it appears that this psalm, though placed here, was in order of time the last of those which David composed.)*
