# Psalms 70

*A prayer for perseverance.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 71**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 70**.)*

**1** A psalm for David.

> Of the sons of Jonadab, and the former captives. In thee, O Lord, I have hoped, let me never be put to confusion: *(**Of the sons of Jonadab...** The Rechabites, of whom see Jeremiah 35. By this addition of the seventy-two interpreters, we gather that this psalm was usually sung in the synagogue, in the person of the Rechabites, and of those who were first carried away into captivity.)*
> **2** Deliver me in thy justice, and rescue me. Incline thy ear unto me, and save me.
> **3** Be thou unto me a God, a protector, and a place of strength: that thou mayst make me safe. For thou art my firmament and my refuge.
> **4** Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the sinner, and out of the hand of the transgressor of the law and of the unjust.
> **5** For thou art my patience, O Lord: my hope, O Lord, from my youth.
> **6** By thee have I been confirmed from the womb: from my mother's womb thou art my protector. Of thee I shall continually sing:
> **7** I am become unto many as a wonder, but thou art a strong helper.
> **8** Let my mouth be filled with praise, that I may sing thy glory; thy greatness all the day long.
> **9** Cast me not off in the time of old age: when my strength shall fail, do not thou forsake me.
> **10** For my enemies have spoken against me; and they that watched my soul have consulted together,
> **11** Saying: God hath forsaken him: pursue and take him, for there is none to deliver him.
> **12** O God, be not thou far from me: O my God, make haste to my help.
> **13** Let them be confounded and come to nothing that detract my soul; let them be covered with confusion and blame that seek my hurt.
> **14** But I will always hope; and will add to all thy praise.
> **15** My mouth shall show forth thy justice; thy salvation all the day long. Because I have not known learning, *(**Learning...** As much as to say, I build not upon human learning, but only on the power and justice of God.)*
> **16** I will enter into the powers of the Lord: O Lord, I will be mindful of thy justice alone.
> **17** Thou hast taught me, O God, from my youth: and till now I will declare thy wonderful works.
> **18** And unto old age and grey hairs: O God, forsake me not, Until I show forth thy arm to all the generation that is to come: Thy power,
> **19** And thy justice, O God, even to the highest great things thou hast done: O God, who is like to thee?
> **20** How great troubles hast thou shown me, many and grievous: and turning thou hast brought me to life, and hast brought me back again from the depths of the earth:
> **21** Thou hast multiplied thy magnificence; and turning to me thou hast comforted me.
> **22** For I will also confess to thee thy truth with the instruments of psaltery: O God, I will sing to thee with the harp, thou holy one of Israel.
> **23** My lips shall greatly rejoice, when I shall sing to thee; and my soul which thou hast redeemed.
> **24** Yea and my tongue shall meditate on thy justice all the day; when they shall be confounded and put to shame that seek evils to me.
