# Psalms 80

*An invitation to a solemn praising of God.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 81**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 80**.)*

**1** Unto the end, for the winepresses, a psalm for Asaph himself. *(**For the winepresses, etc...** Torcularibus. It either signifies a musical instrument, or that this psalm was to be sung at the feast of the tabernacles after the gathering in of the vintage.)*

> **2** Rejoice to God our helper: sing aloud to the God of Jacob.
> **3** Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel: the pleasant psaltery with the harp.
> **4** Blow up the trumpet on the new moon, on the noted day of your solemnity.
> **5** For it is a commandment in Israel, and a judgment to the God of Jacob.
> **6** He ordained it for a testimony in Joseph, when he came out of the land of Egypt: he heard a tongue which he knew not.
> **7** He removed his back from the burdens: his hands had served in baskets.
> **8** Thou calledst upon me in affliction, and I delivered thee: I heard thee in the secret place of tempest: I proved thee at the waters of contradiction. *(**In the secret place of tempest...** Hebrew, *of thunder*. When thou soughtest to hide thyself from the tempest: or, when I came down to mount Sina, hidden from thy eyes in a storm of thunder.)*
> **9** Hear, O my people, and I will testify to thee: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken to me,
> **10** There shall be no new god in thee: neither shalt thou adore a strange god.
> **11** For I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
> **12** But my people heard not my voice: and Israel hearkened not to me.
> **13** So I let them go according to the desires of their heart: they shall walk in their own inventions.
> **14** If my people had heard me: if Israel had walked in my ways:
> **15** I should soon have humbled their enemies, and laid my hand on them that troubled them.
> **16** The enemies of the Lord have lied to him: and their time shall be for ever. *(**Their time shall be forever...** Impenitent sinners shall suffer for ever.)*
> **17** And he fed them with the fat of wheat, and filled them with honey out of the rock.
