# Psalms 74

*There is a just judgment to come: therefore let the wicked take care.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 75**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 74**.)*

**1** Unto the end, corrupt not, a psalm of a canticle for Asaph. *(**Corrupt not...** It is believed to have been the beginning of some ode or hymn, to the tune of which this psalm was to be sung. St. Augustine and other fathers take it to be an admonition of the spirit of God, not to faint or fail in our hope: but to persevere with constancy in good: because God will not fail in his due time to render to every man according to his works.)*

> **2** We will praise thee, O God: we will praise, and we will call upon thy name. We will relate thy wondrous works:
> **3** When I shall take a time, I will judge justices. *(**When I shall take a time...** In proper times: particularly at the last day, when the earth shall melt away at the presence of the great Judge: the same who originally laid the foundations of it, and as it were established its pillars.)*
> **4** The earth is melted, and all that dwell therein: I have established the pillars thereof.
> **5** I said to the wicked: Do not act wickedly: and to the sinners: Lift not up the horn.
> **6** Lift not up your horn on high: speak not iniquity against God.
> **7** For neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the desert hills:
> **8** For God is the judge. One he putteth down, and another he lifteth up:
> **9** For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup of strong wine full of mixture. And he hath poured it out from this to that: but the dregs thereof are not emptied: all the sinners of the earth shall drink.
> **10** But I will declare for ever: I will sing to the God of Jacob.
> **11** And I will break all the horns of sinners: but the horns of the just shall be exalted.
