# Psalms 95

*An exhortation to praise God for the coming of Christ and his kingdom.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 96**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 95**.)*

**1** A canticle for David himself, when the house was built after the captivity.

> Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle: sing to the Lord, all the earth. *(**When the house was built, etc...** Alluding to that time, and then ordered to be sung: but principally relating to the building of the church of Christ, after our redemption from the captivity of Satan.)*
> **2** Sing ye to the Lord and bless his name: show forth his salvation from day to day.
> **3** Declare his glory among the Gentiles: his wonders among all people.
> **4** For the Lord is great, and exceedingly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods.
> **5** For all the gods of the Gentiles are devils: but the Lord made the heavens.
> **6** Praise and beauty are before him: holiness and majesty in his sanctuary.
> **7** Bring ye to the Lord, O ye kindreds of the Gentiles, bring ye to the Lord glory and honour:
> **8** Bring to the Lord glory unto his name. Bring up sacrifices, and come into his courts:
> **9** Adore ye the Lord in his holy court. Let all the earth be moved at his presence.
> **10** Say ye among the Gentiles, the Lord hath reigned. For he hath corrected the world, which shall not be moved: he will judge the people with justice.
> **11** Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad, let the sea be moved, and the fulness thereof:
> **12** The fields and all things that are in them shall be joyful. Then shall all the trees of the woods rejoice
> **13** Before the face of the Lord, because he cometh: because he cometh to judge the earth. He shall judge the world with justice, and the people with his truth.
