# Psalms 16

*A just man's prayer in tribulation against the malice of his enemy.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 17**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 16**.)*

**1** The prayer of David.

> Hear, O Lord, my justice: attend to my supplication. Give ear unto my prayer, which proceedeth not from deceitful lips.
> **2** Let my judgment come forth from thy countenance: let thy eyes behold the things that are equitable.
> **3** Thou hast proved my heart, and visited it by night, thou hast tried me by fire: and iniquity hath not been found in me.
> **4** That my mouth may not speak the works of men: for the sake of the words of thy lips, I have kept hard ways.
> **5** Perfect thou my goings in thy paths: that my footsteps be not moved.
> **6** I have cried to thee, for thou, O God, hast heard me: O incline thy ear unto me, and hear my words.
> **7** Show forth thy wonderful mercies; thou who savest them that trust in thee.
> **8** From them that resist thy right hand keep me, as the apple of thy eye. Protect me under the shadow of thy wings.
> **9** From the face of the wicked who have afflicted me. My enemies have surrounded my soul:
> **10** They have shut up their fat: their mouth hath spoken proudly. *(**Their fat...** That is, their bowels of compassion: for they have none for me.)*
> **11** They have cast me forth, and now they have surrounded me: they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth.
> **12** They have taken me, as a lion prepared for the prey; and as a young lion dwelling in secret places.
> **13** Arise, O Lord, disappoint him and supplant him; deliver my soul from the wicked one; thy sword **14** From the enemies of thy hand. O Lord, divide them from the few of the earth in their life: their belly is filled from thy hidden stores. They are full of children: and they have left to their little ones the rest of their substance. *(**Divide them from the few, etc...** That is, cut them off from the earth, and the few trifling things thereof; which they are so proud of, or divide them from the few; that is, from thy elect, who are but few; that they may no longer have it in their power to oppress them. It is not meant by way of a curse or imprecation; but, as many other the like passages in the psalms, by way of a prediction, or prophecy of what should come upon them, in punishment of their wickedness. Ibid. **Thy hidden stores...** Thy secret treasures, out of which thou furnishest those earthly goods, which, with a bountiful hand thou hast distributed both to the good and the bad.)*
> **15** But as for me, I will appear before thy sight in justice: I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear.
