# Psalms 39

*Christ's coming, and redeeming mankind.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 40**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 39**.)*

**1** Unto the end, a psalm for David himself.

> **2** With expectation I have waited for the Lord, and he was attentive to me.
> **3** And he heard my prayers, and brought me out of the pit of misery and the mire of dregs. And he set my feet upon a rock, and directed my steps.
> **4** And he put a new canticle into my mouth, a song to our God. Many shall see, and shall fear: and they shall hope in the Lord.
> **5** Blessed is the man whose trust is in the name of the Lord; and who hath not had regard to vanities, and lying follies.
> **6** Thou hast multiplied thy wonderful works, O Lord my God: and in thy thoughts there is no one like to thee. I have declared and I have spoken they are multiplied above number.
> **7** Sacrifice and oblation thou didst not desire; but thou hast pierced ears for me. Burnt offering and sin offering thou didst not require:
> **8** Then said I, Behold I come. In the head of the book it is written of me
> **9** That I should do thy will: O my God, I have desired it, and thy law in the midst of my heart.
> **10** I have declared thy justice in a great church, lo, I will not restrain my lips: O Lord, thou knowest it.
> **11** I have not hid thy justice within my heart: I have declared thy truth and thy salvation. I have not concealed thy mercy and thy truth from a great council.
> **12** Withhold not thou, O Lord, thy tender mercies from me: thy mercy and thy truth have always upheld me.
> **13** For evils without number have surrounded me; my iniquities have overtaken me, and I was not able to see. They are multiplied above the hairs of my head: and my heart hath forsaken me. *(**My iniquities...** That is, the sins of all mankind, which I have taken upon me.)*
> **14** Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me. Look down, O Lord, to help me.
> **15** Let them be confounded and ashamed together, that seek after my soul to take it away. Let them be turned backward and be ashamed that desire evils to me.
> **16** Let them immediately bear their confusion, that say to me: 'T is well, 't is well. *(**'T is well...** The Hebrew here is an interjection of insult and derision, like the *Vah*. Matthew 27:49.)*
> **17** Let all that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: and let such as love thy salvation say always: The Lord be magnified.
> **18** But I am a beggar and poor: the Lord is careful for me. Thou art my helper and my protector: O my God, be not slack.
