# Psalms 63

*A prayer in affliction, with confidence in God that he will bring to nought the machinations of persecutors.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 64**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 63**.)*

**1** Unto the end, a psalm for David.

> **2** Hear O God, my prayer, when I make supplication to thee: deliver my soul from the fear of the enemy.
> **3** Thou hast protected me from the assembly of the malignant; from the multitude of the workers of iniquity.
> **4** For they have whetted their tongues like a sword; they have bent their bow a bitter thing,
> **5** To shoot in secret the undefiled.
> **6** They will shoot at him on a sudden, and will not fear: they are resolute in wickedness. They have talked of hiding snares; they have said: Who shall see them?
> **7** They have searched after iniquities: they have failed in their search. Man shall come to a deep heart: *(**A deep heart...** That is, crafty, subtle, deep projects and designs; which nevertheless shall not succeed; for God shall be exalted in bringing them to nought by his wisdom and power.)*
> **8** And God shall be exalted. The arrows of children are their wounds: *(**The arrows of children are their wounds...** That is, the wounds, stripes, or blows, they seek to inflict upon the just, are but like the weak efforts of children's arrows, which can do no execution: and their tongues, that is, their speeches against them come to nothing.)*
> **9** And their tongues against them are made weak. All that saw them were troubled;
> **10** And every man was afraid. And they declared the works of God, and understood his doings.
> **11** The just shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall hope in him: and all the upright in heart shall be praised.
