# Psalms 56

*The prophet prays in his affliction, and praises God for his delivery.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 57**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 56**.)*

**1** Unto the end, destroy not, for David, for an inscription of a title, when he fled from Saul into the cave. [1 Samuel 24.] *(**Destroy not...** Suffer me not to be destroyed.)*

> **2** Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me: for my soul trusteth in thee. And in the shadow of thy wings will I hope, until iniquity pass away.
> **3** I will cry to God the most high; to God who hath done good to me.
> **4** He hath sent from heaven and delivered me: he hath made them a reproach that trod upon me. God hath sent his mercy and his truth,
> **5** And he hath delivered my soul from the midst of the young lions. I slept troubled. The sons of men, whose teeth are weapons and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.
> **6** Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth.
> **7** They prepared a snare for my feet; and they bowed down my soul. They dug a pit before my face, and they are fallen into it.
> **8** My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready: I will sing, and rehearse a psalm.
> **9** Arise, O my glory, arise psaltery and harp: I will arise early.
> **10** I will give praise to thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing a psalm to thee among the nations.
> **11** For thy mercy is magnified even to the heavens: and thy truth unto the clouds.
> **12** Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.
