# Psalms 94

*An invitation to adore and serve God, and to hear his voice.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 95**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 94**.)*

*Praise of a canticle for David himself.*

> **1** Come let us praise the Lord with joy: let us joyfully sing to God our saviour.
> **2** Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving; and make a joyful noise to him with psalms.
> **3** For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods.
> **4** For in his hand are all the ends of the earth: and the heights of the mountains are his.
> **5** For the sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.
> **6** Come let us adore and fall down: and weep before the Lord that made us.
> **7** For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture and the sheep of his hand.
> **8** Today if you shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts: **9** As in the provocation, according to the day of temptation in the wilderness: where your fathers tempted me, they proved me, and saw my works.
> **10** Forty years long was I offended with that generation, and I said: These always err in heart.
> **11** And these men have not known my ways: so I swore in my wrath that they shall not enter into my rest.
