# Psalms 4

*Visit New Advent for the Summa Theologica, Church Fathers, Catholic Encyclopedia and more.*

**1** Unto the end, in verses. A psalm for David. *(**Unto the end...** Or, as St. Jerome renders it, *victori*, to him that overcometh: which some understand of the chief musician; to whom they suppose the psalms, which bear that title, were given to be sung: we rather understand the psalms thus inscribed to refer to Christ, who is the end of the law, and the great conqueror of death and hell, and to the New Testament. -- Ibid. **In verses, in carminibus...** In the Hebrew, it is *neghinoth*, supposed by some to be a musical instrument, with which this psalm was to be sung. -- Ibid. **For David, or to David...** That is, inspired to David himself, or to be sung.)*

> **2** When I called upon him, the God of my justice heard me: when I was in distress, thou hast enlarged me. Have mercy on me: and hear my prayer.
> **3** O ye sons of men, how long will you be dull of heart? why do you love vanity, and seek after lying?
> **4** Know ye also that the Lord hath made his holy one wonderful: the Lord will hear me when I shall cry unto him.
> **5** Be ye angry, and sin not: the things you say in your hearts, be sorry for them upon your beds.
> **6** Offer up the sacrifice of justice, and trust in the Lord: many say, Who showeth us good things?
> **7** The light of thy countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us: thou hast given gladness in my heart.
> **8** By the fruit of their corn, their wine, and oil, they rest:
> **9** In peace in the self same I will sleep, and I will rest:
> **10** For thou, O Lord, singularly hast settled me in hope.
