# Psalms 87

*A prayer of one under grievous affliction: it agrees to Christ in his passion, and alludes to his death and burial.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 88**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 87**.)*

**1** A canticle of a psalm for the sons of Core: unto the end, for Maheleth, to answer understanding of Eman the Ezrahite. *(**Maheleth...** A musical instrument, or chorus of musicians, to answer one another. -- Ibid. **Understanding...** Or a psalm of instruction, composed by Eman the Ezrahite, or by David, in his name.)*

> **2** O Lord, the God of my salvation: I have cried in the day, and in the night before thee.
> **3** Let my prayer come in before thee: incline thy ear to my petition.
> **4** For my soul is filled with evils: and my life hath drawn nigh to hell.
> **5** I am counted among them that go down to the pit: I am become as a man without help,
> **6** Free among the dead. Like the slain sleeping in the sepulchres, whom thou rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.
> **7** They have laid me in the lower pit: in the dark places, and in the shadow of death.
> **8** Thy wrath is strong over me: and all thy waves thou hast brought in upon me.
> **9** Thou hast put away my acquaintance far from me: they have set me an abomination to themselves. I was delivered up, and came not forth:
> **10** My eyes languished through poverty. All the day I cried to thee, O Lord: I stretched out my hands to thee.
> **11** Wilt thou show wonders to the dead? or shall physicians raise to life, and give praise to thee?
> **12** Shall any one in the sepulchre declare thy mercy: and thy truth in destruction?
> **13** Shall thy wonders be known in the dark; and thy justice in the land of forgetfulness?
> **14** But I, O Lord, have cried to thee: and in the morning my prayer shall prevent thee.
> **15** Lord, why castest thou off my prayer: why turnest thou away thy face from me?
> **16** I am poor, and in labours from my youth: and being exalted have been humbled and troubled.
> **17** Thy wrath hath come upon me: and thy terrors have troubled me.
> **18** They have come round about me like water all the day: they have compassed me about together.
> **19** Friend and neighbour thou hast put far from me: and my acquaintance, because of misery.
