# Psalms 79

*A prayer for the Church in tribulation, commemorating God's former favours.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 80**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 79**.)*

**1** Unto the end, for them that shall be changed, a testimony for Asaph, a psalm.

> **2** Give ear, O thou that rulest Israel: thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep. Thou that sittest upon the cherubims, shine forth
> **3** Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses. Stir up thy might, and come to save us.
> **4** Convert us, O God: and show us thy face, and we shall be saved.
> **5** O Lord God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy servant?
> **6** How long wilt thou feed us with the bread of tears: and give us for our drink tears in measure?
> **7** Thou hast made us to be a contradiction to our neighbours: and our enemies have scoffed at us.
> **8** O God of hosts, convert us: and show thy face, and we shall be saved.
> **9** Thou hast brought a vineyard out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the Gentiles and planted it.
> **10** Thou wast the guide of its journey in its sight: thou plantedst the roots thereof, and it filled the land.
> **11** The shadow of it covered the hills: and the branches thereof the cedars of God.
> **12** It stretched forth its branches unto the sea, and its boughs unto the river.
> **13** Why hast thou broken down the hedge thereof, so that all they who pass by the way do pluck it?
> **14** The boar out of the wood hath laid it waste: and a singular wild beast hath devoured it.
> **15** Turn again, O God of hosts, look down from heaven, and see, and visit this vineyard:
> **16** And perfect the same which thy right hand hath planted: and upon the son of man whom thou hast confirmed for thyself.
> **17** Things set on fire and dug down shall perish at the rebuke of thy countenance. *(**Things set on fire, etc...** So this vineyard of thine, almost consumed already, must perish, if thou continue thy rebukes.)*
> **18** Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the son of man whom thou hast confirmed for thyself. *(**The man of thy right hand...** Christ.)*
> **19** And we depart not from thee, thou shalt quicken us: and we will call upon thy name.
> **20** O Lord God of hosts, convert us and show thy face, and we shall be saved.
