# Psalms 139

*A prayer to be delivered from the wicked.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 140**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 139**.)*

**1** Unto the end, a psalm of David.

> **2** Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: rescue me from the unjust man.
> **3** Who have devised iniquities in their hearts: all the day long they designed battles.
> **4** They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: the venom of asps is under their lips.
> **5** Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of the wicked: and from unjust men deliver me. Who have proposed to supplant my steps:
> **6** The proud have hidden a net for me. And they have stretched out cords for a snare: they have laid for me a stumbling block by the wayside.
> **7** I said to the Lord: Thou art my God: hear, O Lord, the voice of my supplication.
> **8** O Lord, Lord, the strength of my salvation: thou hast overshadowed my head in the day of battle.
> **9** Give me not up, O Lord, from my desire to the wicked: they have plotted against me; do not thou forsake me, lest they should triumph.
> **10** The head of them compassing me about: the labour of their lips shall overwhelm them.
> **11** Burning coals shall fall upon them; thou wilt cast them down into the fire: in miseries they shall not be able to stand.
> **12** A man full of tongue shall not be established in the earth: evil shall catch the unjust man unto destruction.
> **13** I know that the Lord will do justice to the needy, and will revenge the poor.
> **14** But as for the just, they shall give glory to thy name: and the upright shall dwell with thy countenance.
