# Psalms 104

*A thanksgiving to God for his benefits to his people Israel.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 105**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 104**.)*

*Alleluia.*

> **1** Give glory to the Lord, and call upon his name: declare his deeds among the Gentiles.
> **2** Sing to him, yea sing praises to him: relate all his wondrous works.
> **3** Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.
> **4** Seek ye the lord, and be strengthened: seek his face evermore.
> **5** Remember his marvellous works which he hath done; his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth.
> **6** O ye seed of Abraham his servant; ye sons of Jacob his chosen.
> **7** He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the earth.
> **8** He hath remembered his covenant for ever: the word which he commanded to a thousand generations.
> **9** Which he made to Abraham; and his oath to Isaac:
> **10** And he appointed the same to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting testament:
> **11** Saying: To thee will I give the land of Chanaan, the lot of your inheritance.
> **12** When they were but a small number: yea very few, and sojourners therein:
> **13** And they passed from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people.
> **14** He suffered no man to hurt them: and he reproved kings for their sakes.
> **15** Touch ye not my anointed: and do no evil to my prophets.
> **16** And he called a famine upon the land: and he broke in pieces all the support of bread.
> **17** He sent a man before them: Joseph, who was sold for a slave.
> **18** They humbled his feet in fetters: the iron pierced his soul,
> **19** Until his word came. The word of the Lord inflamed him.
> **20** The king sent, and he released him: the ruler of the people, and he set him at liberty.
> **21** He made him master of his house, and ruler of all his possession.
> **22** That he might instruct his princes as himself, and teach his ancients wisdom.
> **23** And Israel went into Egypt: and Jacob was a sojourner in the land of Cham.
> **24** And he increased his people exceedingly: and strengthened them over their enemies.
> **25** He turned their heart to hate his people: and to deal deceitfully with his servants. *(**He turned their heart, etc...** Not that God (who is never the author of sin) moved the Egyptians to hate and persecute his people; but that the Egyptians took occasion of hating and envying them, from the sight of the benefits which God bestowed upon them.)*
> **26** He sent Moses his servant: Aaron the man whom he had chosen.
> **27** He gave them power to show them signs, and his wonders in the land of Cham.
> **28** He sent darkness, and made it obscure: and grieved not his words. *(**Grieved not his words...** That is, he was not wanting to fulfil his words: or he did not grieve Moses and Aaron, the carriers of his words: or he did not grieve his words, that is, his sons, the children of Israel, who enjoyed light whilst the Egyptians were oppressed with darkness.)*
> **29** He turned their waters into blood, and destroyed their fish.
> **30** Their land brought forth frogs, in the inner chambers of their kings.
> **31** He spoke, and there came divers sorts of flies and sciniphs in all their coasts. *(**Sciniphs...** See the annotation, Exodus 8:16.)*
> **32** He gave them hail for rain, a burning fire in the land.
> **33** And he destroyed their vineyards and their fig trees: and he broke in pieces the trees of their coasts.
> **34** He spoke, and the locust came, and the bruchus, of which there was no number. *(**Bruchus...** An insect of the locust kind.)*
> **35** And they devoured all the grass in their land, and consumed all the fruit of their ground.
> **36** And he slew all the firstborn in their land: the firstfruits of all their labour.
> **37** And he brought them out with silver and gold: and there was not among their tribes one that was feeble.
> **38** Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them lay upon them.
> **39** He spread a cloud for their protection, and fire to give them light in the night.
> **40** They asked, and the quail came: and he filled them with the bread of heaven.
> **41** He opened the rock, and waters flowed: rivers ran down in the dry land.
> **42** Because he remembered his holy word, which he had spoken to his servant Abraham.
> **43** And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness.
> **44** And he gave them the lands of the Gentiles: and they possessed the labours of the people:
> **45** That they might observe his justifications, and seek after his law. *(**His justifications...** That is, his commandments; which here, and in many other places of the scripture, are called justifications, because the keeping of them makes man just. The Protestants render it by the word *statutes*, in favour of their doctrine, which does not allow good works to justify.)*
