# Psalms 140

*A prayer against sinful words, and deceitful flatterers.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 141**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 140**.)*

*A psalm of David.*

> **1** I have cried to thee, O Lord, hear me: hearken to my voice, when I cry to thee.
> **2** Let my prayer be directed as incense in thy sight; the lifting up of my hands, as evening sacrifice.
> **3** Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth: and a door round about my lips.
> **4** Incline not my heart to evil words; to make excuses in sins. With men that work iniquity: and I will not communicate with the choicest of them.
> **5** The just man shall correct me in mercy, and shall reprove me: but let not the oil of the sinner fatten my head. For my prayer shall still be against the things with which they are well pleased: *(**Let not the oil of the sinner, etc...** That is, the flattery, or deceitful praise. -- Ibid. **For my prayer, etc...** So far from coveting their praises, who are never well pleased but with things that are evil; I shall continually pray to be preserved from such things as they are delighted with.)*
> **6** Their judges falling upon the rock have been swallowed up. They shall hear my words, for they have prevailed: *(**Their judges, etc...** Their rulers, or chiefs, quickly vanish and perish, like ships dashed against the rocks, and swallowed up by the waves. Let them then hear my words, for they are powerful and will prevail; or, as it is in the Hebrew, for they are sweet.)*
> **7** As when the thickness of the earth is broken up upon the ground: Our bones are scattered by the side of hell.
> **8** But to thee, O Lord, Lord, are my eyes: in thee have I put my trust, take not away my soul.
> **9** Keep me from the snare, which they have laid for me, and from the stumbling blocks of them that work iniquity.
> **10** The wicked shall fall in his net: I am alone until I pass. *(**I am alone, etc...** Singularly protected by the Almighty, until I pass all their nets and snares.)*
