# Psalms 111

*The good man is happy.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 112**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 111**.)*

Alleluia, of the returning of Aggeus and Zacharias.

> **1** Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord: he shall delight exceedingly in his commandments.
> **2** His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the righteous shall be blessed.
> **3** Glory and wealth shall be in his house: and his justice remaineth for ever and ever.
> **4** To the righteous a light is risen up in darkness: he is merciful, and compassionate and just.
> **5** Acceptable is the man that showeth mercy and lendeth: he shall order his words with judgment:
> **6** Because he shall not be moved for ever.
> **7** The just shall be in everlasting remembrance: he shall not fear the evil hearing. His heart is ready to hope in the Lord:
> **8** His heart is strengthened, he shall not be moved until he look over his enemies.
> **9** He hath distributed, he hath given to the poor: his justice remaineth for ever and ever: his horn shall be exalted in glory.
> **10** The wicked shall see, and shall be angry, he shall gnash with his teeth and pine away: the desire of the wicked shall perish. *(**PREFACE. Of the returning, etc...** This is in the Greek and Latin, but not in the Hebrew. It signifies that this psalm was proper to be sung at the time of the return of the people from their captivity; to inculcate to them, how happy they might be, if they would be constant in the service of God.)*
