# Psalms 131

*A prayer for the fulfilling of the promise made to David.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 132**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 131**.)*

*A gradual canticle.*

> **1** O Lord, remember David, and all his meekness.
> **2** How he swore to the Lord, he vowed a vow to the God of Jacob:
> **3** If I shall enter into the tabernacle of my house: if I shall go up into the bed wherein I lie:
> **4** If I shall give sleep to my eyes, or slumber to my eyelids,
> **5** Or rest to my temples: until I find out a place for the Lord, a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.
> **6** Behold we have heard of it in Ephrata: we have found it in the fields of the wood. *(**We have heard of it in Ephrata...** When I was young, and lived in Bethlehem, otherwise called Ephrata, I heard of God's tabernacle and ark, and had a devout desire of seeking it; and accordingly I found it at Cariathiarim, the city of the woods: where it was till it was removed to Jerusalem. See 1 Par. 13.)*
> **7** We will go into his tabernacle: we will adore in the place where his feet stood.
> **8** Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place: thou and the ark, which thou hast sanctified.
> **9** Let thy priests be clothed with justice: and let thy saints rejoice.
> **10** For thy servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thy anointed.
> **11** The Lord hath sworn truth to David, and he will not make it void: of the fruit of thy womb I will set upon thy throne.
> **12** If thy children will keep my covenant, and these my testimonies which I shall teach them: Their children also for evermore shall sit upon thy throne.
> **13** For the Lord hath chosen Sion: he hath chosen it for his dwelling.
> **14** This is my rest for ever and ever: here will I dwell, for I have chosen it.
> **15** Blessing I will bless her widow: I will satisfy her poor with bread.
> **16** I will clothe her priests with salvation, and her saints shall rejoice with exceeding great joy.
> **17** There will I bring forth a horn to David: I have prepared a lamp for my anointed.
> **18** His enemies I will clothe with confusion: but upon him shall my sanctification flourish.
