# Psalms 100

*The prophet exhorts all by his example, to follow mercy and justice.*

*(Does this psalm differ from what you were expecting? Don't be confused. There are two systems for arranging the psalms: the **Septuagint** and the **Masoretic**. We use the Septuagint system here. In the Masoretic system, which is used in most modern Bible translations, this psalm is called **Psalm 101**, and the **previous psalm** is known as **Psalm 100**.)*

**1** A psalm for David himself.

> Mercy and judgment I will sing to thee, O Lord: I will sing,
> **2** And I will understand in the unspotted way, when thou shalt come to me. I walked in the innocence of my heart, in the midst of my house. *(**I will understand, etc...** That is, I will apply my mind, I will do my endeavour, to know and to follow the perfect way of thy commandments: not trusting to my own strength, but relying on thy coming to me by thy grace.)*
> **3** I will not set before my eyes any unjust thing: I hated the workers of iniquities. **4** The perverse heart did not cleave to me: and the malignant, that turned aside from me, I would not know.
> **5** The man that in private detracted his neighbour, him did I persecute. With him that had a proud eye, and an unsatiable heart, I would not eat.
> **6** My eyes were upon the faithful of the earth, to sit with me: the man that walked in the perfect way, he served me.
> **7** He that worketh pride shall not dwell in the midst of my house: he that speaketh unjust things did not prosper before my eyes.
> **8** In the morning I put to death all the wicked of the land: that I might cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord.
