# Romans 3

*The advantages of the Jews. All men are sinners and none can be justified by the works of the law, but only by the grace of Christ.*

**1** What advantage then hath the Jew: or what is the profit of circumcision?

**2** Much every way. First indeed, because the words of God were committed to them.

**3** For what if some of them have not believed? Shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? God forbid!

**4** But God is true and every man a liar, as it is written: That thou mayest be justified in thy words and mayest overcome when thou art judged. *(**Note.** God only is essentially true. All men in their own capacity are liable to lies and errors: nevertheless God, who is the truth, will make good his promise of keeping his church in all truth. (See John 16:13))*

**5** But if our injustice commend the justice of God, what shall we say? Is God unjust, who executeth wrath?

**6** (I speak according to man.) God forbid! Otherwise how shall God judge this world?

**7** For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie, unto his glory, why am I also yet judged as a sinner?

**8** And not rather (as we are slandered and as some affirm that we say) let us do evil that there may come good? Whose damnation is just.

**9** What then? Do we excel them? No, not so. For we have charged both Jews and Greeks, that they are all under sin.

**10** As it is written:

> There is not any man just. *(**There is not any man just, viz...** by virtue either of the law of nature, or of the law of Moses; but only by faith and grace.)*
> **11** There is none that understandeth: there is none that seeketh after God.
> **12** All have turned out of the way: they are become unprofitable together: there is none that doth good, there is not so much as one.
> **13** Their throat is an open sepulchre: with their tongues they have dealt deceitfully. The venom of asps is under their lips.
> **14** Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness:
> **15** Their feet swift to shed blood:
> **16** Destruction and misery in their ways:
> **17** And the way of peace they have not known.
> **18** There is no fear of God before their eyes.

**19** Now we know that what things soever the law speaketh, it speaketh to them that are in the law: that every mouth may be stopped and all the world may be made subject to God.

**20** Because by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified before him. For by the law is the knowledge of sin.

**21** But now, without the law, the justice of God is made manifest, being witnessed by the law and the prophets.

**22** Even the justice of God, by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe in him: for there is no distinction.

**23** For all have sinned and do need the glory of God.

**24** Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,

**25** Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to the showing of his justice, for the remission of former sins,

**26** Through the forbearance of God, for the showing of his justice in this time: that he himself may be just and the justifier of him who is of the faith of Jesus Christ.

**27** Where is then thy boasting? It is excluded. By what law? Of works? No, but by the law of faith.

**28** For we account a man to be justified by faith, without the works of the law. *(**By faith, etc...** The faith, to which the apostle here attributes man's justification, is not a presumptuous assurance of our being justified; but a firm and lively belief of all that God has revealed or promised (Hebrews 11). A faith working through charity in Jesus Christ (Galatians 5:6). In short, a faith which takes in hope, love, repentance, and the use of the sacraments. And the works which he here excludes, are only the works of the law: that is, such as are done by the law of nature, or that of Moses, antecedent to the faith of Christ: but by no means, such as follow faith, and proceed from it.)*

**29** Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? yes, of the Gentiles also.

**30** For it is one God that justifieth circumcision by faith and uncircumcision through faith.

**31** Do we then, destroy the law through faith? God forbid! But we establish the law.
