# Song of Songs 2

*Christ caresses his spouse: he invites her to him.*

> **1** I am the flower of the field, and the lily of the valleys. *(**I am the flower of the field...** Christ professes himself the flower of mankind, yea, the Lord of all creatures: and (verse 2) declares the excellence of his spouse, the true church above all other societies, which are to be considered as thorns.)*
> **2** As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.
> **3** As the apple tree among the trees of the woods, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow, whom I desired: and his fruit was sweet to my palate.
> **4** He brought me into the cellar of wine, he set in order charity in me.
> **5** Stay me up with flowers, compass me about with apples: because I languish with love.
> **6** His left hand is under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me.
> **7** I adjure you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and the harts of the field, that you stir not up, nor make the beloved to awake, till she please.
> **8** The voice of my beloved, behold he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping over the hills. *(**The voice of my beloved:** that is, the preaching of the gospel surmounting difficulties figuratively here expressed by mountains and little hills.)*
> **9** My beloved is like a roe, or a young hart. Behold he standeth behind our wall, looking through the windows, looking through the lattices.
> **10** Behold my beloved speaketh to me: Arise, make haste, my love, my dove, my beautiful one, and come.
> **11** For winter is now past, the rain is over and gone.
> **12** The flowers have appeared in our land, the time of pruning is come: the voice of the turtle is heard in our land:
> **13** The fig tree hath put forth her green figs: the vines in flower yield their sweet smell. Arise, my love, my beautiful one, and come:
> **14** My dove in the clefts of the rock, in the hollow places of the wall, show me thy face, let thy voice sound in my ears: for thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely.
> **15** Catch us the little foxes that destroy the vines: for our vineyard hath flourished. *(**Catch us the little foxes...** Christ commands his pastors to catch false teachers, by holding forth their fallacy and erroneous doctrine, which like foxes would bite and destroy the vines.)*
> **16** My beloved to me, and I to him who feedeth among the lilies,
> **17** Till the day break, and the shadows retire. Return: be like, my beloved, to a roe, or to a young hart upon the mountains of Bether.
