# Zechariah 4

*The vision of the golden candlestick and seven lamps, and of the two olive trees.*

**1** And the angel that spoke in me came again: and he waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep.

**2** And he said to me: What seest thou? And I said: I have looked, and behold a candlestick all of gold, and its lamp upon the top of it: and the seven lights thereof upon it: and seven funnels for the lights that were upon the top thereof. *(**A candlestick, etc...** The temple of God that was then in building; and in a more sublime sense, the church of Christ.)*

**3** And two olive trees over it: one upon the right side of the lamp, and the other upon the left side thereof.

**4** And I answered, and said to the angel that spoke in me, saying: What are these things, my lord?

**5** And the angel that spoke in me answered, and said to me: Knowest thou not what these things are? And I said: No, my lord.

**6** And he answered, and spoke to me, saying: This is the word of the Lord to Zorobabel, saying: Not with an army, nor by might, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hosts. *(**To Zorobabel...** This vision was in favour of Zorobabel: to assure him of success in the building of the temple, which he had begun, signified by the candlestick; the lamp of which, without any other industry, was supplied with oil, dropping from the two olive trees, and distributed by the seven funnels or pipes, to maintain the seven lights.)*

**7** Who art thou, O great mountain, before Zorobabel? thou shalt become a plain: and he shall bring out the chief stone, and shall give equal grace to the grace thereof. *(**Great mountain...** So he calls the opposition made by the enemies of God's people; which nevertheless, without an army or might on their side, was quashed by divine providence. -- Ibid. **Shall give equal grace, etc...** Shall add grace to grace, or beauty to beauty.)*

**8** And the word of the Lord came to me, saying:

**9** The hands of Zorobabel have laid the foundations of this house, and his hands shall finish it: and you shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me to you.

**10** For who hath despised little days? and they shall rejoice, and shall see the tin plummet in the hand of Zorobabel. These are the seven eyes of the Lord, that run to and fro through the whole earth. *(**Little days...** That is, these small and feeble beginnings of the temple of God. -- Ibid. **The tin plummet...** Literally, the stone of tin. He means the builder's plummet, which Zorobabel shall hold in his hand for the finishing the building. -- Ibid. **The seven eyes...** The providence of God, that oversees and orders all things.)*

**11** And I answered, and said to him: What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick, and upon the left side thereof?

**12** And I answered again, and said to him: What are the two olive branches, that are by the two golden beaks, in which are the funnels of gold?

**13** And he spoke to me, saying: Knowest thou not what these are? And I said: No, my lord.

**14** And he said: These are two sons of oil who stand before the Lord of the whole earth. *(**Two sons of oil...** That is, the two anointed ones of the Lord; viz., Jesus the high priest, and Zorobabel the prince.)*
