# Zechariah 5

*The vision of the flying volume, and of the woman in the vessel.*

**1** And I turned and lifted up my eyes: and I saw, and behold a volume flying. *(**A volume...** That is, a parchment, according to the form of the ancient books, which, from being rolled up, were called volumes.)*

**2** And he said to me: What seest thou? And I said: I see a volume flying: the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.

**3** And he said to me: This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the earth: for every thief shall be judged as is there written: and every one that sweareth in like manner shall be judged by it.

**4** I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of hosts: and it shall come to the house of the thief, and to the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

**5** And the angel went forth that spoke in me, and he said to me: Lift up thy eyes, and see what this is, that goeth forth.

**6** And I said: What is it? And he said: This is a vessel going forth. And he said: This is their eye in all the earth. *(**This is their eye...** This is what they fix their eye upon: or this is a resemblance and figure of them, viz., of sinners.)*

**7** And behold a talent of lead was carried, and behold a woman sitting in the midst of the vessel.

**8** And he said: This is wickedness. And he cast her into the midst of the vessel, and cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.

**9** And I lifted up my eyes and looked: and behold there came out two women, and wind was in their wings, and they had wings like the wings of a kite: and they lifted up the vessel between the earth and the heaven.

**10** And I said to the angel that spoke in me: Whither do these carry the vessel?

**11** And he said to me: That a house may be built for it in the land of Sennaar, and that it may be established, and set there upon its own basis. *(**The land of Sennaar...** Where Babel or Babylon was built (Genesis 11), where note, that Babylon in holy writ is often taken for the city of the devil: that is, for the whole congregation of the wicked: as Jerusalem is taken for the city and people of God.)*
