# Lecture 11 — The dignity of the first intelligence

The things that pertain to intellect involve certain difficulties, for of the things apparent to us, it seems to be the most divine, but how it is so gives rise to certain difficulties.  

> For if it is not actually understanding, but is in a sense like one asleep, what dignity will it have? Or, if it is understanding but its chief good is different from itself, then, since its essence is not an act of understanding, but a potency, it will not be the best substance. For it is by reason of its act of understanding that dignity belongs to it.

> Furthermore, whether its substance is its power to understand or its act of understanding, what does it understand? For it understands either itself or something else; and if something else, either the same thing always or something different.

> Does it make any difference or not, then, whether it understands what is good or what is contingent? Or is it absurd that it should ponder about certain things?

> Hence, it is evident that it understands what is most divine and honorable, and that it does not change, for a change would be for the worse, and this would already be motion.

> Therefore, if the first mover is not its act of understanding but a potency, it is reasonable to first assume that the continuity of its act of understanding is laborious to it (1050b22).

> Second, [it is evident] that there is something else more honorable than intellect, namely, what it understands. For both the power to understand and understanding itself belong even to one who understands the basest thing.

> This must accordingly be avoided, for there are some things that it is better not to see than to see. But this will not be so if the act of understanding is the best of things. Therefore, if there is a most powerful intellect, it must understand itself.

> And its act of understanding is an understanding of understanding. But science, perception, opinion, and thought always seem to be about something else and only indirectly about themselves.

> Again, if understanding is something different from being understood, from which of these does the intellect derive its goodness? For the essence of understanding and that of being understood are not the same.

> But, in certain cases, is not understanding identical with the thing understood? For in the productive sciences, the object is the substance or quiddity without matter, and in the theoretical sciences, the intelligible structure is both the object and the understanding of it.

> Therefore, since the object of understanding does not differ from the act of understanding in the case of things that have no matter, they will be the same, and the act of understanding will be identical with the thing understood.

> Yet the difficulty still remains as to whether the thing that it understands is composite.

> For if it is, the intellect will be changed in passing from one part of the whole to another.

> Now, whatever does not have matter is indivisible, like the human intellect.

> And the act of understanding composite things involves time. For it does not possess its goodness at this or at that moment, but attains the greatest good over a whole period of time, and this is something different from itself. And an intellect which understands itself is in this state through all eternity.

> **2600**. Having settled the issue about the perfection and oneness of this immaterial substance, the Philosopher now meets certain difficulties concerning its action, for it has been shown above (1072a26–1072b3; [2519–35]) that the first immaterial substance causes motion as an intelligible object and a desirable good. This is divided into two parts.

In the first (1074b15; [2600]), he settles certain difficulties about the first immaterial substance insofar as it is an intelligible good and an intellect;  

in the second (1075a11; [2628]), insofar as it is a desirable good, at ***we must also inquire***.  

In regard to the first, he does two things.  

First, he gives the reason for the difficulty concerning the intellect of the first substance.  

Second (1074b17; [2601]), he raises and meets this difficulty, at ***for if it is not***.  

He accordingly first says (1074b15) that the things that pertain to the intellect of the first immaterial substance involve certain difficulties, and these seem to arise as follows. The Philosopher has shown that the intellect which understands and desires the first mover, which causes motion as an object of understanding and of desire, has something nobler than itself, namely, what is understood and desired by it. He has also shown that the first intelligible object itself is also an intellect. Hence for a like reason it could appear that the first intellect also has something nobler and higher than itself, and that it therefore is not the highest and best thing. But this is contrary to the truths that are apparent about the first principle, and so he says here that it seems evident to all that this principle is the noblest. Yet certain difficulties emerge if one wishes to explain how it is noblest, that is, best and most perfect.  

**2601**. ***For if it is not*** (1074b17). Then he clears up these difficulties, and in regard to this, he does three things.  

First, he raises the difficulties.  

Second (1074b25; [2606]), he prefaces his discussion with certain prerequisites for meeting all the questions raised, at ***hence, it is evident***.  

Third (1074b28; [2608]), he solves these difficulties, at ***therefore, if the first mover***.  

In regard to the first, he does two things.  

First (1074b17), he raises the questions in which he is chiefly interested.  

Second (1074b23; [2604]), he introduces an additional question whose solution is necessary for solving the questions raised, at ***does it make***.  

First of all, he raises two questions.  

He first asks how the intellect of the first mover is related to its own act of understanding;  

second (1074b21; [2603]), how it is related to its own intelligible object, at ***furthermore, whether***.  

Now, it should be noted that an intellect can be related to its own act of understanding in three ways:  

first, actual understanding does not belong to it but only potential or habitual understanding;  

second, actual understanding does belong to it;  

third, it is identical with its own act of understanding or its own knowledge, which are the same thing.  

**2602**. He accordingly first says (1074b17) that, if the intellect of the first mover is not actually understanding, but only potentially or habitually understanding, it will have no dignity. For the goodness and nobility of an intellect consists in its actually understanding, and an intellect that is only potentially or habitually understanding is like one asleep. For one asleep has certain powers that enable him to perform vital operations, even though he is not using them, and thus he is said to be half alive; and during sleep, there is no difference between happiness and unhappiness or between virtue and vice.  

But if the intellect of the first intelligence is actually understanding yet its chief good, which is its activity, is something different from itself because its ***act of understanding***, that is, its intellectual activity, is not identical with its own essence, then its essence is related to its act of understanding as potency to act, and as something perfectible to its perfection. It accordingly follows that the first intellect is not the best substance, for it is by reason of its act of understanding that honor and nobility belong to it, and nothing that is noble in comparison with something else is noblest in itself.  

It seems to follow, then, that the essence of the first intellect is not the best, whether it understands only potentially or actually, unless one assumes along with this that its very essence is identical with its act of understanding, as he will establish later on (1074b28; [2608]).  

**2603**. ***Furthermore, whether its substance*** (1074b21). Before he answers the questions raised, he asks another about the intelligible object of the first mover. He says that whether the essence of the first mover is ***its power to understand or its*** ***act of understanding***—that is, its intellectual activity or thought (this was the first question raised)—we must still ask what it understands. For it understands either itself or something else. And if it understands something else, it must understand either the same thing always or something different, that is, sometimes one thing and sometimes another.  

**2604**. ***Does it make any difference*** (1074b23). So, before he answers the foregoing questions, he introduces another question whose solution is useful in giving the answer: whether it makes any difference or none at all to the nobility or perfection of the intellect that it should understand what is good and noble or what is contingent.  

**2605**. By using an instance he shows that it does make a difference, because it seems incongruous and unreasonable that anyone should ponder or employ the operation of his intellect on things that are base. That this should not be the case would demand that the nobility of the intellect be independent of the nobility of its object, and that the understanding of base things be no different from the understanding of good things. But this is quite impossible, since activities are evidently specified by their proper objects. Hence, the nobler an object, the nobler must be the operation.  

**2606**. ***Hence, it is evident*** (1074b25). He prefaces his discussion with certain points necessary for answering the main questions. First, he gives two points.  

He infers the first of these from the solution of the question which he interjected. For if it does make a difference to the nobility of the intellect whether it understands what is good or what is contingent, as has been stated (1074b23; [2605]), then, since the first intellect is the noblest, it obviously knows what is most divine and most honorable.  

**2607**. The second point is the solution given to the last part of the second main question. The question was whether the intellect of the first mover changes from one intelligible object to another. Now, it is evident that it does not change from one object to another. For, since it understands what is most divine, if it were to change from one object to another, it would change to a less noble one; but this is fitting only to something tending to defect and destruction.  

Moreover, this change from one intelligible object to another would be a kind of motion; therefore, it could not be fitting to the first mover, since he is immovable in every respect.  

**2608**. ***Therefore, if the first mover*** (1074b28). He now answers the questions first raised.  

First, he gives the correct solution to the first question;  

second (1074b29; [2611]), the solution to the second question, at ***second, that***.  

He answers the first question as follows. If the substance of the first mover ***is not its act of understanding***, that is, its own intellectual activity, ***but*** an intellective ***potency***, ***it is reasonable***, that is, it seems to follow as a probable conclusion, ***that the continuity of its act of understanding***, namely, of its intellectual operation, ***is laborious to it***. For whatever is in potency to something else is related both to this something else and to its opposite, because what can be can also not be. Hence, if the substance of the first mover is related to its act of understanding as potency to act, then according to the nature of its own substance, it will be able both to understand and not to understand. Therefore, continuous understanding will not be proper to it by reason of its own substance.  

**2609**. In order not to be sometimes like one asleep, it must derive the continuity of its intellectual activity from something else. Now, whatever a thing acquires from something else and does not have by its own nature is probably laborious to it, because this is true in our case; for when we act continuously, we labor. But this conclusion is not necessary, because that which one thing acquires from something else is laborious to it only if the thing acquired or something connected with it is contrary to its nature. Therefore, even though the continuity of the motion of the heavens depends on some external principle, such motion is not laborious.  

**2610**. Hence Aristotle was content here to reduce to absurdity the probable conclusion which follows, because the untenable conclusion which necessarily follows is evident, namely, that the goodness and perfection of the first mover will depend on some higher entity, for then it would not be the first and best.  

**2611**. ***Second, that there is*** (1074b29). He now answers the second question, and in regard to this, he does three things.  

First, he establishes the correct answer to the second question.  

Second (1074b34; [2617]), he argues on the opposite side of the question, at ***and its act of understanding***.  

Third (1074b38; [2619]), he answers the arguments given, at ***but, in certain cases***.  

He accordingly first says (1074b29) that, since it has been shown (1074b28; [2608]) that the substance of the first mover is not an intellective potency, but is itself an act of understanding, it is evident from this that, if the first mover does not understand itself, but something else, it follows that this other thing, namely, what is understood by it, is nobler than the first mover.  

**2612**. He proves this as follows. Actual understanding itself (namely, thinking) also belongs to one who understands the basest thing. Hence it is evident that some actual understanding must be avoided, because ***there are some things that it is better not to see in act than to see***. But this would not be the case if the act of understanding were the best of things, because then, no act of understanding would have to be avoided. Therefore, since some act of understanding must be avoided because of the baseness of the thing understood, it follows that the nobility of the intellect, which is found in its understanding, will depend on the nobility of its object. Hence the intelligible object is nobler than the act of understanding.  

**2613**. Since it has been shown that the first mover is its own act of understanding, it follows that, if it understands something different from itself, this other thing will be nobler than it is. Therefore, since the first mover is the noblest and most powerful, it must understand itself, and in its case, intellect and thing understood must be the same.  

**2614**. Now, we must bear in mind that the Philosopher’s aim is to show that God does not understand something else, but only himself, inasmuch as the thing understood is the perfection of the one understanding and of his activity, which is understanding. It is also evident that nothing else can be understood by God in such a way that it would be the perfection of his intellect. It does not follow, however, that all things different from himself are not known by him; for by understanding himself, he knows all other things.  

**2615**. This is made clear as follows. Since God is his own act of understanding and is the noblest and most powerful being, his act of understanding must be most perfect. Therefore, he understands himself most perfectly. Now, the more perfectly a principle is known, the more perfectly is its effect known in it; for things derived from principles are contained in the power of their principle. Therefore, since the heavens and the whole of nature depend on the first principle, which is God, God obviously knows all things by understanding himself.  

**2616**. And the baseness of any object of knowledge does not lessen his dignity; for the actual understanding of anything more base is to be avoided only insofar as the intellect becomes absorbed in it, and when, in actually understanding that thing, the intellect is drawn away from the understanding of nobler things. For if, in understanding some noblest object, base things are also understood, the baseness of the things understood does not lessen the nobility of the act of understanding.  

**2617**. ***And its act of understanding*** (1074b34). Then he raises two objections against the correct solution.  

The first is as follows. The first mover understands himself, as has been shown above (1074b29; [2615]); and he is his own act of understanding, as has also been shown (1074b28; [2608]). Hence his act of understanding does not differ from his act of understanding his own thought. But this is contrary to what seems to be true, because perception, science, opinion, and thought always seem to be about something else.  

And if they are sometimes about themselves, as when someone perceives that he perceives, or knows that he knows, or is of the opinion that he has an opinion, or thinks that he is thinking, this seems to be something in addition to the principal act or operation, for the principal action here seems to be that whereby someone understands an intelligible object. But that someone should understand that he is understanding something intelligible seems to be accessory to the principal act. Thus, if the first mover’s act of understanding consists solely in his understanding his own thought, it seems to follow that his act of understanding is not the most important thing.  

**2618**. ***Again, if understanding*** (1074b36). Then he raises a second objection against the correct solution. He says that the act of understanding and the thing understood are obviously different, and even if it were possible for an intellect and its object to be the same in reality, they would not be the same in their formal structure. Hence, if the first mover is himself both his act of understanding and the object that is being understood, which is the best of things, there still seems to be the problem as to which of these confers goodness on him, namely, his act of understanding or the thing understood.  

**2619**. ***But, in certain cases*** (1074b38). He now answers the objections raised. He says that, in certain cases, the thing understood is the same as the knowledge of it. This becomes clear when we draw a distinction between the sciences, for one kind of science is productive and another is speculative. In the case of a productive science, the thing understood, taken without matter, is the science of that thing; for example, it is clear that a house without matter, insofar as it exists in the mind of the builder, is the very art of building; similarly, health in the mind of the physician is the medical art itself. Thus a productive art is evidently nothing else than the substance or quiddity of the thing made, for every artist proceeds to his work from a knowledge of the quiddity that he intends to produce.  

**2620**. In the case of the speculative sciences, it is evident that the concept, which defines the thing itself, is the thing understood and the science or knowledge of that thing. For an intellect has knowledge by reason of the fact that it possesses the concept of a thing. Therefore, since in the case of all those things that do not have matter, the intellect, when actually understanding, does not differ from the thing understood, then in the case of the first substance, which is separate from matter in the highest degree, the act of understanding and the thing understood are evidently the same in the highest degree.  

Hence there is just one act of understanding pertaining to the thing understood; that is, the act of understanding the thing understood is not distinct from that of understanding the act of understanding.  

**2621**. ***Yet the difficulty*** (1075a5). Here he raises a third question in addition to the two dealt with above. For, since it has been shown (1072b26; [2544]) that the first mover understands himself, and that a thing is understood in two ways—first, by way of a simple understanding, as we understand a quiddity, and second, by way of a composite understanding, as we know a proposition—the question therefore arises of whether the first mover understands himself by way of a simple understanding or by way of a composite one. This is what he refers to when he says that the difficulty still remains as to whether the object of God’s understanding is composite.  

**2622**. Now, he shows that it is not composite when he says, ***for if it is*** (1075a6), and he gives three arguments in support of this.  

The first goes as follows. In every composite object of understanding, there are several parts, which can be understood separately. For even though this composite object of understanding “a man runs,” insofar as it is one composite object, is understood all at once, nevertheless, its parts can be understood separately. For the term “a man” can be understood by itself, and so also can the term “runs.” Hence, whoever understands some composite object can be changed when his act of understanding passes from one part to another. Therefore, if the first intelligible object is composite, it follows that the intellect can change when its act of understanding passes from one part of this object to another. But the contrary of this has been proved above (1074b38; [2619]).  

**2623**. ***Now, whatever*** (1075a6). Then he gives the second argument. Whatever does not have matter is simple and indivisible. But the first intellect does not have matter. Therefore, it is simple and indivisible.  

**2624**. He gives as an example the human intellect, and this example can be taken in two ways.  

First, it can be taken as a comparison, meaning that the human intellect is indivisible in its own essence, because it is an immaterial form in every respect.  

**2625**. It can also be taken in a second and better way as a contrast, meaning that the human intellect knows composite things because it derives its intelligible objects from material things. And this is not true of the first intellect.  

**2626**. ***And the act*** (1075a8). He gives the third argument. An act of understanding that is concerned with composite things does not possess its perfection always, but attains it over a period of time. This is clear from the fact that it does not attain its good in knowing one part or another, but its greatest good is something else, which is a kind of whole. Hence the truth (which is the good of the intellect), is not found in simple things, but in a composite one.  

Further, simple things are prior to composite things as regards both generation and time, such that whatever does not possess its own good in knowing parts that can be understood separately, but in knowing the whole that is constituted of them, attains its good at some particular moment and does not always possess it. However, the first mover’s act of understanding, which is of himself, is eternal and always in the same state. Therefore, the thing understood by the intellect of the first mover is not composite.
