# Lecture 12 — God as final cause of the universe

We must also inquire how the nature of the whole contains the good and the highest good, whether as something separate and self-subsisting or as the order of its parts.  

> Or is it in both ways, as an army does? For the good of an army consists both in its order and in its commander, but mainly in the latter; for he does not exist for the sake of the order, but the order exists for him.

> And all things, both plants and animals (those that swim and those that fly), are ordered together in some way, but not alike; and things are not such that there is no relation between one thing and another, but there is a connection.

> For all things are ordered together to one end, but in the same way as in a household, where the children are not permitted to do just as they please, but all or most of the things done are arranged in an orderly way, while the slaves and livestock do little for the common good but act for the most part at random.

> For the nature of each of these constitutes such a principle—I mean that, by it, all must be able to be distinguished. And there are other activities that all participate in the whole.

> And we must not fail to consider all the impossible and incongruous conclusions that confront those who explain things differently, and what sort of views are expressed by the more popular thinkers, among whom the fewest difficulties appear.

> For all these thinkers derive all things from contraries. But neither “all things” (1071b3) nor “from contraries” (1069b3) is correct. Nor do they explain how the things in which contraries are present come from contraries.

> For contraries cannot be acted upon by one another. But this difficulty is solved by us in a reasonable way on the ground that there is a third element. Some thinkers make one of the contraries matter, like those who make the unequal the matter of the equal, or the many the matter of the one. But this is also met in the same way, for matter, as one, is contrary to nothing.

> Further, all things except the one will exist by participating in evil, for evil itself is one of the two elements (988a8).

> For other thinkers consider neither good nor evil as principles, even though the good is in the fullest sense a principle of things.

> The former are right in holding that the good is a principle, but they do not say how it is a principle: whether as an end or as a mover or as a form.

> And Empedocles’ doctrine (984b32) is also unreasonable; for he identifies the good with friendship, although the latter is a principle both as a mover (for it combines things) and as matter (for it is a part of the mixture).

> Therefore, even if it happens that the same thing is a principle both as matter and as a mover, still their being is not the same. In what respect, then, is friendship a principle? And it is also unreasonable that strife should be indestructible; for the essence of evil, for him, is precisely this strife.

> Again, Anaxagoras makes the good a principle as a mover; for his “Intellect” causes motion.

> But it causes motion for the sake of some goal, and therefore, there must be something other than intellect (988b6), unless it is as we say, for the art of medicine is in a sense health (1032b6).

> It is also unreasonable not to provide something that is contrary to the good (1032b6) or to intellect.

> But all who speak of contraries fail to make use of them as such, except that some make use of imagery.

> And none of them explain why some things are destructible and others are not, for they derive all things from the same principles (1000a5–1000b17).

> Again, some derive beings from non-being, while others (986b10) make all things one lest they be driven to this.

> Further, no one explains why there is always generation, and what its cause is.

> And those who posit two principles of things must assume a first principle that is superior. This also holds for those who posit separate forms, because there is another principle that is more important.

> For why has matter participated in the forms or why does it participate in them?

> And for other thinkers, there must be something contrary to wisdom or the noblest science, but this is not so in our case.

> For there is nothing contrary to what is primary, since all contraries involve matter, and things having matter are in potency.

> And ignorance is contrary to the particular knowledge which is the contrary into which it can pass. But there is nothing contrary to what is primary.

> Further, if nothing exists except sensible things, there will be no principle, no order, no generation, no heavenly bodies; but every principle will have a principle, as is maintained by all the theologians and natural philosophers.

> Now, if there are separate forms and numbers, they will not be causes of anything; but if they are, they will certainly not be causes of motion.

> Again, how will extension or continuous quantity be composed of parts that are unextended? For number cannot produce a continuum, either as a mover or as a form.

> Further, no one of the contraries will be a productive principle and a mover, because it would be possible for it not to be. And in any case, its activity would be subsequent to its potency. No beings, then, would be eternal. But some are. Therefore, one of these premises must be rejected. How this may be done has been explained (1071b17).

> Again, as to the way in which numbers, or soul and body, or forms and things in general, are one, no one states anything; nor is it possible to do so unless he says, as we do, that a mover makes them one (1045a7–1045b16).

> And those who say that mathematical number is the primary reality and that there is always one substance after another, giving different principles for each, make the substance of the universe itself a group of substances unrelated to each other (for one substance confers nothing upon another, either by being or not being) and give us many principles. But beings do not want to be badly disposed. *But many rulers are not good. Therefore, let there be one ruler*. *(*Iliad* 2.204.)*

> **2627**. Having shown how the first mover is both an intelligence and an intelligible object, here the Philosopher aims to investigate how the first mover is a good and an object of desire, and in regard to this, he does two things.

First (1075a11; [2628]), he shows how the good is present in the universe according to his opinion;  

second (1075a25; [2638]), according to the opinions of other philosophers, at ***and we must not fail***.  

In regard to the first, he does two things.  

First, he raises a question.  

Second (1075a13; [2629]), he answers it, at ***or is it***.  

Now this question arises because of a statement made above, that the first mover causes motion as something good and desirable. For good, inasmuch as it is the end of a thing, is twofold.  

For an end is extrinsic to the thing ordained to it, as when we say that a place is the end of something that is moved locally.  

Or it is intrinsic, as a form is the end of the process of generation or alteration; a form already acquired is a kind of intrinsic good of the thing whose form it is.  

Now, the form of any whole that is one through the arrangement of its parts is the order of that whole. Hence it follows that it is a good of that whole.  

**2628**. Therefore, the Philosopher asks whether the nature of the whole universe has its good and highest good—that is, its proper end—as something separate from itself, or whether this consists in the ordering of its parts in the way in which the good of any natural being is its own form.  

**2629**. ***Or is it*** (1075a13). Then he answers the question raised; and in regard to this, he does two things.  

First, he shows that the universe has both a separate good and a good of order.  

Second (1075a16; [2632]), he shows the ways in which the parts of the universe contribute to its order, at ***and all things***.  

He accordingly first says (1075a13) that the universe has its good and end in both ways. For there is a separate good, which is the first mover, on which the heavens and the whole of nature depend as their end or desirable good, as has been shown (1072a26; [2520]). And since all things having one end must agree in their ordination to that end, some order must be found in the parts of the universe. Thus the universe has both a separate good and a good of order.  

**2630**. We see this, for example, in the case of an army, for the good of the army is found both in the order itself of the army and in the commander who has charge of the army. But the good of the army is found in a higher degree in its commander than in its order, because the goodness of an end takes precedence over that of the things that exist for the sake of the end. Now, the order of an army exists for the purpose of achieving the good of its commander, namely, his will to attain victory. But the opposite of this is not true, namely, that the good of the commander exists for the sake of the good of order.  

**2631**. And since the formal character of things that exist for the sake of an end is derived from the end, it is therefore necessary not only that the good of the army exist for the sake of the commander but also that the order of the army depend on the commander, since its order exists for the sake of the commander.  

In this way, too, the separate good of the universe, which is the first mover, is a greater good than the good of order that is found in the universe. For the whole order of the universe exists for the sake of the first mover, inasmuch as the things contained in the mind and will of the first mover are realized in the ordered universe. Hence, the whole order of the universe must depend on the first mover.  

**2632**. ***And all things*** (1075a16). Here he shows the ways in which the parts of the universe contribute to its order. He says that all things in the universe are ordered together in some way, but not all are ordered alike—for example, sea animals, birds, and plants. Yet, even though they are not ordered in the same way, they are still not disposed in such a way that one of them has no connection with another, but there is some affinity and relationship of one with another. For plants exist for the sake of animals, and animals for the sake of men. That all things are related to each other is evident from the fact that all are connected together to one end.  

**2633**. That all are not ordered in the same way is made clear by an example. In an ordered household or family, different ranks of members are found. Under the head of the family, there is a first rank, namely, that of the sons, and a second rank, which is that of the slaves, and a third rank, which is that of the domestic animals, as dogs and the like. For ranks of this kind have a different relation to the order of the household, which is imposed by the head of the family, who governs the household. For it is not proper for the sons to act in a haphazard and disorderly way, but all or most of the things that they do are ordered. This is not the case with the slaves or domestic animals, however, because they share to a very small degree in the order that exists for the common good. But, in their case, we find many things that are contingent and haphazard, and this is because they have little connection with the ruler of the household, who aims at the common good of the household.  

**2634**. And just as the order of the family is imposed by the law and precept of the head of the family (who is the principle of everything ordered in the household) with a view to carrying out the activities that pertain to the order of the household, in a similar fashion, the nature of physical things is the principle by which each of them carries out the activity proper to it in the order of the universe. For just as any member of the household is disposed to act through the precept of the head of the family, in a similar fashion, any natural being is disposed by its own nature.  

Now, the nature of each thing is a kind of inclination implanted in it by the first mover, who directs it to its proper end. And from this, it is clear that natural beings act for the sake of an end even though they do not know that end, because they acquire their inclination to their end from the first intelligence.  

**2635**. However, not all things are disposed to this end in the same way. For there is something common to all things, since all things must succeed in being distinguished—namely, they must have discrete and proper operations, and must also be differentiated essentially from each other. In this respect, order is lacking in none of them. But there are some things that not only have this but are also such that all their activities ***participate in the whole***, that is, are directed to the common good of the whole. This is found to be true of those things that contain nothing contrary to their nature, nor any element of chance, but everything proceeds according to the right order.  

**2636**. For it is evident, as has been pointed out (1075a16; [2632–34]), that each natural being is directed to the common good by reason of its proper natural action. Hence, those things that never fail in their proper natural action have all their activities contributing to the whole. But those that sometimes fail in their proper natural action do not have all their activities contributing to the whole, and lower bodies are of this kind.  

**2637**. The answer briefly stated, then, is that order requires two things: a distinction between the things ordered, and the contribution of the distinct things to the whole.  

As regards the first of these, order is found in all things without fail; but, as regards the second, order is found in some things, and these are the things that are highest and closest to the first principle, as the separate substances and the heavenly bodies, in which there is no element of chance or anything contrary to their nature. But order is lacking in some things, namely, in lower bodies, which are sometimes subject to chance and to things that are contrary to their nature. This is so because of their distance from the first principle, which is always the same.  

**2638**. ***And we must not*** (1075a25). Then he deals with the end and order of the universe according to the opinion of other philosophers. In regard to this, he does two things.  

First, he explains what he aims to do. He says that we must state all the impossible or incongruous conclusions facing those who express views different from our own about the good and order of the universe. We must also state the kind of views held by those men who give a better explanation of things and in whose statements fewer difficulties appear.  

**2639**. ***For all these*** (1075a28). He then carries out his plan. In regard to this, he does two things.  

First (1075a28; [2639]), he gives the opinion of those who held that the principles of things are contraries;  

second (1075b24; [2656]), the opinion of those who held that the principles of things are separate natures, at ***further, if nothing***.  

In treating the first point, he does two things.  

First (1075a28), he explains in what way those men are wrong who say that the principles of things are contraries.  

He says that all the ancient philosophers held that all things come from contraries as their principles, and they were wrong on three counts.  

First, they were wrong in holding that things come from contraries;  

second, in saying that all things come from contraries;  

third, in failing to explain how things are produced from contraries.  

**2640**. ***For contraries*** (1075a30). Second, he indicates how they were wrong in the three ways mentioned above.  

He explains how they first erred in holding that things come from contraries;  

second (1075a34; [2643]) in claiming that all things come from contraries, at ***further, all things except the one***;  

and third (1075b11; [2650]) in failing to show how things come from contraries, at ***but all who speak***.  

He accordingly first says that they were wrong in saying that things comes from contraries, because contraries taken in themselves cannot be acted upon by one another. For whiteness is not acted upon by blackness or vice versa, and one thing could come from them only if they were influenced by one another and so were reduced to an intermediate state.  

**2641**. But, in Aristotle’s opinion, this difficulty is easily solved, for besides the two contraries, he also posited a third principle, matter. Hence, one of the two contraries can be acted upon by the other in the sense that matter, which is the subject of one contrary, can be acted upon by the other contrary.  

**2642**. But others claimed that matter is one of the two contraries, and not something distinct from them, as is evident in the case of those who held that the contraries, the unequal and the equal, and the one and the many, are principles. For they attribute inequality and plurality to matter, and equality and unity to form, as is found in Plato’s opinion, although the natural philosophers held the opposite. But this statement of theirs is met in the same way, because matter, which is one thing as the common subject of contraries, is contrary to nothing.  

**2643**. ***Further, all things except the one*** (1075a34). Then the Philosopher explains how these thinkers were wrong in saying that all things come from contraries, and in regard to this, he does two things.  

First, he shows the unreasonable conclusion which follows from this view. For it is evident that the primary contraries are good and evil, because one of two contraries is always the privation of the other, and so has the character of evil. Therefore, if all things come from contraries, it follows that all things participate in evil as well as in unity or good, which is a principle. For good is posited as one of the two elements, and everything else is supposed to come from these two principles. But this is not true, because destruction and evil are not found in the heavenly bodies or in the nature of the separate substances.  

**2644**. ***For other thinkers*** (1075a36). Second, he shows that the position of all those who held that all things come from contraries is not in agreement with the position of certain of the philosophers. For if all things come from contraries, it follows that good and evil are the first principles of things, as has been pointed out. But some did not claim that good and evil are principles, but said that the good is the principle of all things.  

**2645**. ***The former*** (1075a38). Third, he indicates the error made even by those who claimed that the good is a principle of things.  

He first makes this clear in a general way. He says that, even though some philosophers are right in holding that the good is a principle of all things, they are still wrong in failing to show how it is a principle, namely, whether as an end or as a form or as a mover. For these things are characterized by perfection and goodness. But matter, which is perfected only by form, does not have the character of something good and perfect; therefore, he makes no mention of it.  

**2646**. ***And Empedocles’ doctrine*** (1075b1). Next, he turns to certain particular opinions.  

First, he considers the opinion of Empedocles. He says that Empedocles made the unreasonable assumption that the good is a principle of things; for he claimed that love is a principle, identifying it with the good. However, he said that love is a principle in two ways.  

For he claimed that it is a moving principle, inasmuch as its function is to unite things and bring them together, and he also claimed that it is a material principle.  

For he asserts that love is a part of compounds, since he assumed that bodies are compounds of the four elements and of friendship and strife.  

And even though the same principle can be both matter and a mover, it is not such under the same formal aspect. For fire can be a mover according to its form and a material principle according to its matter, but it cannot be both in the same respect, because a mover as such is actual, whereas matter as such is potential. Hence, it must still be explained in what respect love has the character of a material principle and in what respect it has the character of a mover. And he fails to do this.  

**2647**. Another incongruity which follows from Empedocles’ opinion is his positing strife as a first indestructible principle. For strife in itself seems to be essentially evil, and evil, in the opinions of those who are right, is not set down as a principle, but only the good is, as has been stated (1075a36; [2644]).  

**2648**. ***Again, Anaxagoras*** (1075b8). Third, he turns to the opinion of Anaxagoras. He says that Anaxagoras makes the good to be a first principle of things as a mover, for he said that an intellect moves all things. But it is evident that an ***intellect*** ***always causes motion for the sake of some goal***, that is, an end. Hence Anaxagoras must posit some other principle by reason of which this intellect causes motion, unless perhaps he should say, as we have, that an intellect and its intelligible object can be the same, and that an intellect moves for its own sake—which is true in a sense of those things that act by intellect, according to our view. For the art of medicine acts for the sake of health, and health is in a sense the art of medicine itself, as has been pointed out above (1032b6; [2619, 1407]).  

**2649**. Another unreasonable consequence which is contrary to the opinion of Anaxagoras also seems to follow if the common view is maintained, namely, that contraries are the principles of all things. For, according to this view, it would be absurd for him not to make some principle contrary to the good and to intellect.  

**2650**. ***But all who speak*** (1075b11). He explains the third error which he noted above (1075a28–1075a30; [2639–40]), namely, that those who held the principles to be contraries did not explain how things come from contraries as their principles. He says that all those who speak of contraries as principles fail to make use of them in accounting for what appears in the world, unless ***some make use of imagery***, that is, unless someone wishes to indulge his fancy or to speak figuratively.  

**2651**. ***And none of them*** (1075b13). First, he shows that they cannot account for the differences between destructible and indestructible things. He accordingly says that none of the ancient philosophers give any reason why some beings are destructible and some are not.  

Some of them claimed that all things are derived from the same principles, namely, contraries. This is the opinion of the ancient natural philosophers.  

Others, the theological poets, held that all things come from non-being. Hence he said above (1072a9; [2515]) that they generate the world from non-being. And so, although both groups assign the origin of all things, they cannot explain why things are distinguished into destructible and indestructible.  

Hence, others, in order not to be driven to this—namely, to posit that all things come from non-being or to account for the difference between things—held that all things are one, thereby entirely doing away with the distinction between things. This is the view of Parmenides and Melissus.  

**2652**. ***Further, no one*** (1075b16). Second, he shows that they were also wrong in another respect, namely, in being unable to explain why generation is eternal or to state what the universal cause of generation is. For neither of the contraries is a universal cause of generation.  

**2653**. ***And those who*** (1075b17). Third, he states how those men were wrong who claimed that the principles of things are contraries. For they must maintain that one of two contraries is a superior principle, since one contrary has the character of a privation.  

Or he means that it is necessary to posit some principle that is more important than both contraries and by which it is possible to explain why certain things are attributed to one of the contraries as their principle and why certain others are attributed to the other contrary—for example, why, at one time, strife will cause the elements to separate and why, at another time, friendship will cause them to combine.  

**2654**. This difficulty also faces those who posit separate forms, for they must assign some principle that is superior to the forms, since it is evident that things that are generated and destroyed do not always participate in a form in the same way. Hence it is necessary to posit some principle by which it is possible to explain why this individual formerly participated or now participates in a form.  

**2655**. ***And for other thinkers*** (1075b20). Here he gives a fourth incongruity which faces these thinkers. He says that the philosophers who claim that the principles of things are contraries must admit that there is something contrary to the primary kind of wisdom or noblest science, because wisdom is concerned with the first principle, as has been shown in book 1 (981b27; [35]). Therefore, if there is nothing contrary to the first principle (for all pairs of contraries have a nature that is in potency to each pair), and according to us, the first principle is immaterial, as is clear from what has been said (1071b20; [2495]), then it follows that there is nothing contrary to the first principle, and that there is no science contrary to the primary science, but merely ignorance.  

**2656**. ***Further, if nothing*** (1075b24). Next, he turns to the opinion of those who posited separate substances.  

First, he points out that an incongruity faces those who fail to posit such substances. He says that, if nothing exists except sensible things, there will be no first principle, as has been noted (1071b3; [2489]), no order of things such as has been described, no eternal generation, and no principles of the kind which we have posited above (1071b25; [2503]). But every principle will always have a principle, and so on to infinity. Thus Socrates will be begotten by Plato, and he by someone else, and so on to infinity, as was seen to be the view of all of the ancient philosophers of nature. For they did not posit a first universal principle over and above these particular and sensible principles.  

**2657**. ***Now, if there*** (1075b27). Then he shows that an unreasonable consequence faces those who posit certain separate natures.  

He first does this with regard to those who posited a certain connection in origin among natures of this kind;  

second (1075b37; [2661]), with regard to those who did not hold this position, at ***and those who say***.  

Concerning the first, he draws out four untenable consequences.  

The first (1075b27) of these is that the separate forms and numbers, which some posited over and above sensible things, seem not to be causes of anything. But if they are causes of something, it seems that nothing will be a cause of motion, because things of this kind do not seem to have the character of a moving cause.  

**2658**. ***Again, how will*** (1075b28). Second, he brings forward another incongruity. For number is not continuous quantity, but continuous quantity is constituted only of continuous quantities. Hence, it seems impossible to explain how continuous quantity or extension comes from numbers, which are not continuous. For it cannot be said that number is the cause of continuous quantity either as a moving cause or as a formal cause.  

**2659**. ***Further, no one*** (1075b30). Then he gives the third untenable consequence. He says that, if the separate forms and numbers are first principles, then, since contrariety is not found in forms and numbers, it follows that first principles will not be contraries, because they are not held to be productive principles or movers. Hence, it will follow that there is no generation or motion, for if the first principles are not efficient causes of motion, but are subsequently caused from first principles, it will follow that they are contained in the potency of prior principles; and what can be can also not be. The conclusion, then, is that generation and motion are not eternal. But they are eternal, as has been proved above (1071b3; [2490–91]). Therefore, one of the premises must be rejected, namely, the one holding that first principles are not movers. The way in which the first principles are movers has been stated in book 1 (982b4–982b7; [50–51]).  

**2660**. ***Again, as to the way*** (1075b34). He gives the fourth incongruity. He says that none of these philosophers can state what it is that makes a unity out of number, or soul and body—or, in general, form and the thing to which form belongs—unless he says that a mover does this, as we explained above in book 8 (1045a25; [1759]). Forms and numbers, however, do not have the character of a mover.  

**2661**. ***And those who say*** (1075b37). Here he indicates the unreasonable consequence facing those who claim that natures of this kind are unrelated things. He says that ***those who say that mathematical number is the primary reality***, as the Pythagoreans did, ***and that there is always one substance after another*** consecutively (such that after number comes continuous quantity, and after continuous quantity come sensible things), and who say that there is a different principle for each nature (such that there are certain principles for numbers, others for continuous quantity, and others for sensible things)—those who speak in this way, I say, make the substances of the universe a group of substances ***unrelated to each other***, that is, without order, inasmuch as one part confers nothing on any other part whether it exists or does not. And they likewise make their many principles to be unrelated.  

**2662**. Now, this cannot be the case, because beings do not want to be badly disposed, for the disposition of natural things is the best possible. We observe this in the case of particular things, because each is best disposed in its own nature. Hence, we must understand this to be the case to a much greater degree in the whole universe.  

**2663**. But ***many rulers are not good***, just as it would not be good for different families that shared nothing in common to live in a single home. Hence, it follows that the whole universe is like one principality and one kingdom, and thus must be governed by one ruler.  

And this is what he concludes, that there is ***one ruler*** of the whole universe, the first mover, and one first intelligible object, and one first good, whom above he called God (1072b26; [2544]), who is blessed for ever and ever. Amen.
