# Lecture 11 — Summary of ancient opinions

We have examined, then, in a brief and summary way those philosophers who have spoken about the principles of things and about the truth, and the way in which they did this. Yet we have learned from them this much: none of those who have discussed principle and cause have said anything beyond the points established by us in the *Physics*.  

> Yet all have approached these causes obscurely.

> For some speak of the principle as matter, whether they suppose it to be one or many, and whether they assume it to be a body or something incorporeal, as Plato speaks of the great and small; the Italians of the unlimited; Empedocles of fire, earth, water, and air; and Anaxagoras of an infinite number of like parts. All these have touched on this kind of cause, and so also have those who make the first principle air or fire or water or something denser than fire or rarer than air. For they have said that some such body is the primary element. These thinkers, then, have touched only on this cause.

> But others have introduced the source of motion. For example, those who make friendship and strife, or intellect, or love, or something besides these, a principle of things.

> But the quiddity or substance no one has presented clearly. Those who express it best are those who posit the ideas and the intelligible natures inherent in the ideas.

> For they do not think of the ideas and the things inherent in them as the matter of sensible things; nor do they think of them as the source from which motion originates, for they say that these things are the causes rather of immobility and of that which is at rest. But the forms are responsible for the quiddity of all other things, and the one for the quiddity of the forms.

> That for the sake of which there are actions and changes and motions they affirm in some way to be a cause, but not in the way we are determining causes, or in the way in which it is truly a cause.

> For while those who speak of intellect or love posit these causes as good, they do not say that anything exists or comes to be because of them, but claim that the motion of things stems from them. In like manner, those who say that the one or being is such a reality say that it is the cause of substance, but not that things either are or come to be for the sake of this. Hence, it happens to them that in a way they both say and do not say that the good is a cause, for they do not speak of it in its principal aspect but in a secondary one.

> Therefore, all these philosophers, being unable to touch on any other cause, seem to bear witness to the fact that we have dealt correctly with the causes, as to both their number and their kinds. Moreover, it is evident that all principles must be sought in this way or in some similar one. As to the way in which each of these philosophers has spoken, and how they have raised possible problems about the principles of things, let us discuss these points next.

> **171**. Here he makes a summary of everything that the early philosophers have said about causes, and in regard to this he does three things.

First (988a18; [171]), he shows that the early philosophers were unable to add another kind of cause to the four genera of causes given above (983a24; [70]).  

Second (988a22; [172]), he indicates the way in which they touched upon these causes, at ***yet all***.  

Third (988b16; [180]), he draws the conclusion at which he chiefly aims, at ***therefore, all these***.  

He first says (988a18) that in giving this brief and summary account he has stated who the philosophers are, and how they have spoken of the principles of things and of what is true of the substance itself of things. And from their statements this much can be learned: none of those who have spoken about causes and principles were able to mention any causes other than those distinguished in *Physics* 2.  

**172**. ***Yet all*** (988a22). Here he gives the way in which they dealt with each of the causes.  

He does this first (988a22) in a general way,  

and second (988a23; [172]), in a special way, at ***for some speak***.  

Accordingly he says first that they not only have not added anything, but in the way in which they approached these causes they proceeded obscurely and not clearly. For they have not stated to what genus of cause the principles posited by them would belong, but they gave as principles things that can be adapted to some genus of cause.  

**173**. ***For some speak*** (988a23). Here he shows in a special way how they touched on each of these causes.  

He shows first (988a23) how they touched on the material cause;  

second (988a32; [174]), on the efficient cause, at ***but others***;  

third (988a34; [175]), on the formal cause, at ***but the quiddity***;  

fourth (988b6; [177]), on the final cause, at ***that for the sake of which***.  

He says first (988a23) that those philosophers, the early ones, all agree insofar as they assign some material cause to things. Yet they differ in two respects.  

First, they differ in that some, such as Thales, Diogenes, and the like, held that the material principle is one, whereas others, such as Empedocles, claimed that it is many.  

Second, they differ in that some, such as the first group above, held that the material principle of things is a body, whereas others, such as Plato who posited a dyad, claimed that it is something incorporeal.  

For Plato posited the great and small, which the Platonists do not speak of as a body. The Italians, or Pythagoreans, posited the unlimited, but neither is this a body. Empedocles, on the other hand, posited the four elements, which are bodies; Anaxagoras also posited ***an infinite number of like parts***, or that the principles of things are an infinite number of like parts.  

All of these thinkers have touched on ***this kind of cause***, or the material cause, and so also have those who said that the principle of things is air or water or fire or something midway between these elements (that is, what is denser than fire and rarer than air). For all philosophers such as those just mentioned have claimed that some kind of body is the first element of things.  

Thus Aristotle’s statement is evident: in the light of the foregoing remarks these philosophers have posited only the material cause.  

**174**. ***But others*** (988a32). Here he gives their opinions about the efficient cause. He says that some of the foregoing philosophers have posited, in addition to the material cause, a cause from which motion begins—for example, those who made love or hate or intellect a cause of things, or those who introduced some other active principle distinct from these, as Parmenides, who made fire an efficient cause.  

**175**. ***But the quiddity*** (988a34). Here he gives their opinions about the formal cause. He says that no one attributed the cause through which a thing’s substance is known (that is, the formal cause) to things with any clarity. And if the ancient philosophers touched on something that might pertain to the formal cause (as Empedocles did when he claimed that bone and flesh contain some proportion of the elements by which they are things of this kind), nevertheless they did not treat what belongs to the formal cause after the manner of a cause.  

**176**. But among the other philosophers, those who posited the forms and those intelligible aspects which belong to the forms (such as unity, number, and the like) came closest to positing the formal cause.  

For the forms and everything that belongs to the forms in the aforesaid way, such as unity and number, are not acknowledged or assumed by them to be the matter of sensible things, since they place matter rather on the side of sensible things; nor do they claim that the forms are the causes from which motion originates in the world, but rather that they are the cause of immobility in things.  

For they said that whatever is found to be necessary in sensible things is caused by the forms, and that these, the forms, are immobile. For they claimed that the forms, because immobile, are uniform in being, as has been said (987a29; [156]), so that definitions can be given of them and demonstrations made about them. But according to the opinion of these men the forms are responsible for the quiddity of particular things after the manner of a formal cause, and the one is responsible for the quiddity of the forms.  

*All the foregoing weak on final cause*  

**177**. ***That for the sake of which*** (988b6). Here he gives the opinions of certain thinkers about the final cause. He says that in one sense the philosophers say that the goal for the sake of which motions, changes, and activities occur is a cause, and in another sense they do not. And they neither speak of it in the same way, nor in the way in which it is a true cause. For those who affirm that intellect or love is a cause posit these causes as good. For they said that things of this kind are the causes of things being well disposed, since the cause of good can only be good.  

Hence it follows that they could make intellect and love to be causes, just as the good is a cause. But good can be understood in two ways: in one way as a final cause in the sense that something comes to be for the sake of some good, and in another way as an efficient cause, as we say that the good man does good.  

Now these philosophers did not say that the foregoing causes are good in the sense that they are the reason for the existence or coming to be of some beings, which pertains to the intelligibility of the final cause, but in the sense that there proceeds from these causes—intellect and will—a kind of motion toward the being and coming-to-be of things. And this pertains to the intelligibility of the efficient cause.  

**178**. In a similar way, the Pythagoreans and Platonists, who said that the substance of things is the one itself or being, also attributed goodness to the one or being. Thus they said that such a reality, the good, is the cause of the substance of sensible things, either in the manner of a formal cause (as the Platonists maintained), or in the manner of a material cause (as the Pythagoreans claimed).  

However, they did not say that the being and coming-to-be of things exists for the sake of this (that is, the one or being); this is something that pertains to the intelligibility of the final cause.  

Hence, just as the philosophers of nature claimed that the good is a cause in the manner of an efficient cause and not in that of a formal cause, in a similar way the Platonists claimed that the good is a cause in the manner of a formal cause, and not in that of a final cause. The Pythagoreans, on the other hand, considered it to be a cause in the manner of a material cause.  

**179**. It is evident, then, that in one sense they happened to speak of the good as a cause and in another not. For they did not speak of it as a cause in its principal aspect, but in a secondary one, because according to its proper intelligible structure the good is a cause in the manner of a final cause. This is clear from the fact that the good is what all desire. Now that to which an appetite tends is a goal. Therefore, according to its proper intelligible structure the good is a cause in the manner of a goal.  

Hence those who make the good a cause in its principal aspect claim that it is a final cause. But those who attribute a different mode of causality to the good claim that the good is a cause but only accidentally, because they do not hold that it is such by reason of being good, but by reason of that to which good happens to belong by reason of its being active or perfective. Hence it is clear that those philosophers posited a final cause only accidentally, because they posited as a cause something that is fitting to be an end—namely, the good. However, they did not claim that it is a cause in the manner of a final cause, as has been stated.  

*Conclusion*  

**180**. ***Therefore, all these*** (988b16). Here he draws the conclusion at which he chiefly aims: the things established about the causes, both as to their number and their kinds, are correct. For the foregoing philosophers seem to bear witness to this in being unable to add another genus of cause to those discussed above. This is one of the useful things resulting from the account of the foregoing views.  

Another is that evidently the principles of things must be investigated in this science, either all or some of those which the ancient philosophers posited and which have been established above. For this science considers chiefly the formal and final cause, and also in a sense the efficient cause. Now it is not only necessary that the above views be discussed, but after this examination it is also necessary to describe the way in which each of these men has spoken (both in what sense their statements are acceptable and in what sense not), and how the statements which have been made about the principles of things contain a problem.
