# Lecture 4 — Opinions about the material cause

It is evident, then, that one must acquire scientific knowledge of those causes which stand at the beginning, for we say that we have scientific knowledge of each thing when we think we comprehend its first cause. Now causes are spoken of in four ways. Of these we say that one is the substance or quiddity *(Throughout the text, *quod quid erat esse* is translated as “quiddity” or “essence,” except where a more literal rendering of the phrase is required.)* of a thing, for the first “why” of a thing is reduced to its ultimate intelligible structure, and the first why of a thing is a cause or principle. Another is the matter or subject. A third is the source of motion. A fourth is the cause which is opposite to this, namely, that for the sake of which, or the good; for this is the goal of every generation and motion. There has been sufficient consideration of these in our works on nature.  

> However, let us examine those who have undertaken an investigation of existing things and have philosophized about the truth before us. For evidently they too speak of certain principles and causes. Therefore, to us who come later [their views] will serve as an introduction to the study which we are now making, for we shall either discover some other genus of cause, or be more convinced of those which have just been expounded.

> Most of those who first philosophized thought that only the things that belong to the species of matter are the principles of all things. For that of which all things are composed, from which they first come to be, and into which they are finally dissolved while their substance remains (although it is changed in its attributes)—this they call the element and principle of existing things.

> And for this reason they thought that nothing is either generated or corrupted, as if such a reality always remained in existence. And just as we do not say that Socrates comes to be in an unqualified sense when he becomes good or musical, or is corrupted when he loses these states, because the subject Socrates himself remains, in the same way they say that nothing else is generated or corrupted. For there must be some matter, either one or more than one, from which other things come to be, and which itself remains in existence. However, they do not all speak in the same way about the number and nature of such a principle.

> Thales, the originator of this kind of philosophy, says that this principle is water; this is why he also claimed that the earth rests upon water.

> For presumably he took this position because he saw that the nutriment of all things is moist, that heat itself is generated from this, and that animal life comes from this. But that from which each thing comes to be is a principle of all things. He bases his opinion on this, then,

> and on the fact that the seeds of all things have a moist nature, and water is by nature the principle of moist things.

> But there are some who think that the ancients who lived long before the present generation and were the first to speculate about the gods held this view about the nature of things. For they made Oceanus and Tethys the parents of generation, and held the oath of the gods to be by a body of water, to which the poets gave the name Styx. For what is oldest is most honorable, and what is most honorable is that by which one swears. Whether this view of nature is in fact the ancient and primary one is perhaps uncertain. Thales is said to have expressed himself in this way about the first cause, but no one could say that Hippo is to be included in this group, because of the weakness of his understanding.

> Anaximenes and Diogenes hold that air is prior to water and is the most fundamental of the simple bodies.

> Hippasus of Metopontium and Heraclitus of Ephesus hold that fire [is the primary principle].

> Empedocles holds that there are four [simple bodies], since he adds a fourth—earth—to those already mentioned. For he says that these always remain and only become many or few in number by being combined into a unity and separated out of a unity.

> Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, who was prior to Empedocles in years but later in his speculations, says that the principles of things are infinite in number. For he says that nearly all bodies which are made up of parts like themselves, such as fire or water, are generated or corrupted merely by combining and separating; but that otherwise they are neither generated nor corrupted but always remain in existence. From these views, then, one might think that the only cause is the one which is said to belong to the species of matter.

> **69**. Having set forth a preface in which he indicates the aim of this science, its dignity and goal, Aristotle begins to deal with this science; and this is divided into two parts.

In the first [70], he explains what the first philosophers had to say about the causes of things.  

In the second [274], he begins to pursue the truth of this science. He does this in book 2, at ***theoretical or speculative knowledge*** (993a30).  

The first part is divided into two members.  

First, he gives the opinions of the philosophers about the causes of things.  

Second [181], he criticizes them insofar as their statements are unsatisfactory, at ***therefore, all those*** (988b22).  

In regard to the first he does two things.  

First, he takes up again the enumeration of causes which was treated in greater detail in *Physics* 2.  

Second [72], he presents the opinions of the philosophers, at ***however, let us examine*** (983b1).  

The four causes and three characteristics of final cause  

**70**. Accordingly, he first says that, since it is evident that wisdom speculates about causes, we ought to begin by acquiring knowledge from the causes of things. This also seems to be in keeping with the intelligible structure of science, because we say that we know each thing scientifically when we think we are not ignorant of its cause.  

Now causes are spoken of in four ways. One of these is the formal cause, which is the very substance of a thing by which we know what each thing is. For it is well known, as is stated in *Physics* 2, that we do not say that anything has a nature before it has received a form. Now it is clear that a form is a cause, because to answer the question “Why is something so?” we go back to its formal cause as its ultimate explanation, beginning with proximate forms and proceeding to the ultimate form. But evidently the “why” asks about a cause and principle. Hence it is evident that a form is a cause. A second cause is the material cause. A third is the efficient cause, which is the source of motion. A fourth is the final cause, which is opposite to the efficient cause as a goal is to a starting-point, for motion begins with the efficient cause and terminates with the final cause. This cause is also that for the sake of which a thing comes to be, and the good of each nature.  

**71**. He makes the final cause known by three considerations. It is the goal of motion, and thus is opposite to the source of motion, which is the efficient cause. It is first in intention, and for this reason is said to be that for the sake of which. And it is desirable of itself, and for this reason is called a good, for the good is what all desire.  

Hence, in explaining how the final cause is opposite to the efficient cause, he says that it is the end of every process of generation and motion, whose starting point is the efficient cause. By these two types of change he seems to imply that there is a twofold goal. For the goal of a process of generation is the form itself, which is a part of a thing. But the goal of motion is something sought for outside the thing moved. He says that he has treated these causes at sufficient length in the *Physics*, lest he should be asked to make a more extensive treatment of them.  

**72**. ***However, let us examine*** (983b1). Here he states what the philosophers had to say about the causes; and in regard to this he does two things.  

First, he gives the reasons why this must be done;  

and, second (983b6; [73]), he begins to carry out his plan, at ***most of those***.  

Accordingly, he says that even though there is a treatise on the causes in the *Physics* it is still necessary to consider the opinions of the philosophers who first undertook an investigation of the natures of existing things, and have philosophized about the truth before him; because they too set down causes and principles. Therefore, for us who have come later, a consideration of their opinions will be ***first***, or a preamble, ***in the study***, that is, to the art which we are now seeking.  

Hence the text of Boethius also says: ***therefore, as we enter upon the task of this science, their opinions will constitute a preamble to the road that is now to be traveled***. Another text has: ***therefore, as we enter upon our present course it will be a certain work of life in the investigation that now confronts us***, and it must be read in this way: ***therefore, as we enter upon our present course***, that is, upon the present study and art, it will be necessary to consider the opinion of these men ***as a work of life***, that is to say, as necessary, like works which are done for the preservation of life, so that this reading is interpreted as a metaphorical way of speaking, meaning by ***work of life*** anything necessary.  

Now this is useful, because from the opinions of these men we will either discover another genus of causes over and above those already enumerated, or be more convinced of the things that have just been stated about the causes, namely, that there are four of them.  

**73**. ***Most of those*** (983b6). Here he begins to deal with the opinions of the ancient philosophers; and in regard to this he does two things.  

First (983b6), he states their opinions;  

second (988b22; [181]), he finds fault with them, at ***therefore, all those***.  

In regard to the first he does two things.  

First, he states the opinions which each one of the philosophers held about the causes.  

Second (988a18; [171]), he summarizes the discussion, at ***we have examined***.  

The first part is divided into two parts.  

In the first (983b6; [74]), he gives the opinions of those who omitted the formal cause.  

In the second (987a29; [151]), he gives the opinion of Plato, who was the first to posit a formal cause, at ***after the philosophies***.  

In regard to the first he does two things.  

First, he gives the opinion of those who claimed that certain evident things are principles.  

Second (985b4; [112]), he gives the opinions of those who devised extrinsic principles, at ***Leucippus and his colleague***.  

In regard to the first he does two things.  

First, he touches on the opinions which the ancient philosophers held about the material cause;  

second (984a18; [93]), on their opinions about the efficient cause, at ***but as men***.  

In regard to the first he does two things.  

First, he states in a general way the views of those who posited a material cause.  

Second (983b20; [77]), he examines their views in detail, at ***Thales, the originator***.  

In regard to the first he does two things.  

First, he states their opinions about the material cause.  

Second (983b11; [75]), he states their opinions about the generation of things, which follow from the first, at ***and for this reason***.  

Opinions of those who gave only material cause; four characteristics of matter  

**74**. Accordingly, he says first (983b6) that most of those who first philosophized about the natural world held that the principles of all things are merely those which are referred to the species of material cause. In regard to this, it must be said that they took the four conditions of matter which seem to belong to the notion of a principle.  

For that of which a thing is composed seems to be a principle of that thing. But matter is such a thing, for we say that a thing that has matter is “of” its matter, as a knife is of iron.  

That from which a thing comes to be (which is also a principle of the process of generation of that thing) seems to be one of its causes, because a thing comes into being by way of generation. But a thing first comes to be from matter, because the matter of things precedes their production. And a thing does not come from matter in an accidental way, for a thing is generated in an accidental way from its contrary or privation, as when we say that white comes from black.  

Third, that into which all things are ultimately dissolved by corruption seems to be a principle of things. For just as principles are first in the process of generation, in a similar way they are last in the process of dissolution. Obviously this too pertains to matter.  

Fourth, since a principle must remain in existence, then that which remains throughout the process of generation and corruption seems to be a principle. Now the matter which they said is the substance of a thing remains throughout every transmutation, although its attributes, such as its form and everything that accrues to it over and above its material substance, are changed. From all these considerations they concluded that matter is the element and principle of all beings.  

No generation or corruption without a material cause  

**75**. ***And for this reason*** (983b11). Then he gives, as a secondary point, what they held as following from the above—namely, that in the world nothing is generated or corrupted in an absolute sense.  

For when some change occurs with regard to a thing’s attributes, and its substance remains unchanged, we do not say that it is generated or corrupted in an absolute sense, but only in a qualified one. For example, when Socrates becomes good or musical, we do not say that he simply comes to be, but comes to be this. And similarly when he loses a state of this kind, we do not say that he is corrupted in an absolute sense, but only in a qualified one. But matter (which is the substance of things according to them) always remains, and every change affects some of a thing’s accidents, such as its attributes.  

From this they concluded that nothing is generated or corrupted in an absolute sense, but only in a qualified one.  

**76**. Yet even though they all agreed in positing a material cause, nevertheless they differed in their position in two respects: first, with respect to the number of material causes, because some held that there is one, and others many; second, with respect to its nature, because some held that it is fire, others water, and so on. Similarly, among those who posited many material causes, some assigned certain ones as the material principles of things, and some the others.  

**77**. ***Thales, the originator*** (983b20). Here he begins to give the opinions of each of the philosophers about the material cause.  

First, he gives the opinions of those who posited one material cause;  

second [88], the opinions of those who posited many, at ***Empedocles*** (984a8).  

In regard to the first he does three things.  

First, he gives the opinions of those who claimed that water is the principle of all things;  

second [86], he gives the opinion of those who made air the principle of things, at ***Anaximenes*** (984a5);  

and third [87], the opinion of those who claimed that fire is the principle of things, at ***Hippasus*** (984a7).  

In regard to the first he does two things.  

First, he gives the opinion of Thales, who said that water is the principle of things;  

second [79], the reason for this opinion (***for presumably***).  

He says then that Thales, the originator ***of this kind of philosophy***, speculative philosophy, said that water is the first principle of all things. Thales is said to have been the originator of speculative philosophy because he was the only one of the seven wise men who came after the theological poets to make an investigation into the causes of things, the other sages being concerned with moral matters.  

The names of the seven wise men are as follows. The first was Thales of Miletus, who lived during the time of Romulus and when Achaz, King of Israel, was reigning over the Hebrews. The second was Pittacus of Mitylene, who lived when Sedecias was reigning over the Hebrews and when Tarquinius Priscus was reigning over the Romans. The other five sages were Solon of Athens, Chilo of Lacedaemon, Periander of Corinth, Cleobulus of Lydia, and Bias of Prienne, all of whom lived during the period of the Babylonian captivity.  

Hence, since Thales alone among these men investigated the natures of things and distinguished himself by committing his arguments to writing, he is described here as the originator of this science.  

**78**. Nor should it be thought unfitting if he touches here on the opinions of those who have treated only the philosophy of nature, because, according to the ancients, who knew no other substance except the bodily and mobile, it was necessary that first philosophy be the philosophy of nature, as is stated in book 4. And from this position Thales next adopted this one, that the earth rests upon water, as anything having a principle is based on its principle.  

**79**. ***For presumably he took*** (983b22). Here he gives the reasons by which Thales could be led to the above position.  

First, he shows how he was led to this position by his own reasoning;  

and second [82], by the authority of his predecessors, at ***but there are some*** (983b27).  

Now he was led by two lines of reasoning.  

One is taken from the cause itself of a thing.  

The other is taken from a consideration of the generation of things, at ***and on the fact*** (983b22).  

Therefore, these premises are related. For the second follows from the first, because that which is a principle of being of other things is also the first principle from which things are generated. The third follows from the second, because by corruption each thing is dissolved into that from which it was generated. The fourth follows from the second and the third; for that which precedes the generation of things and remains after they have been corrupted must always remain in being.  

**80**. In the first line of reasoning he uses three indications to show that water is the principle of being of things.  

The first of these is that the nutriment of living things must be moist. But living things derive nourishment and being from the same principle; thus moisture appears to be the principle of being of things.  

The second indication is that the being of any physical thing, and especially of a living one, is conserved by its proper and natural heat. But heat seems to be generated from moisture, since moisture itself is in a sense the matter of heat. Hence from this it appears that moisture is a principle of being of things.  

The third indication is that animal life depends on moisture. Hence an animal dies as a result of its natural moisture being dried up, and is kept in existence as a result of its moisture being preserved. But in living things, to live is to be. Hence it is also evident from this that moisture is a principle of being of things.  

These three indications also have a natural connection with one another. For an animal is nourished by moisture, because its natural heat is sustained by moisture. And from these two it follows that animal life is always due to moisture. But that from which a thing comes to be (that is, from which a thing gets its being) is a principle of everything that derives being from it. And for this reason he adopted this opinion that moisture is the principle of all things.  

**81**. In a similar way, he also draws an indication of this from the generation of things, because the processes of generation of living things, which are the noblest of beings, come from seed. But the seed or spermata of all living things has a moist nature. Hence from this it also appears that moisture is a principle of generation of things. Again, if we add to all of the above points the fact that water is the principle of moisture, it follows that water is the first principle of things.  

**82**. ***But there are some*** (983b27). Here he shows how Thales was led to the above position by the authority of the ancients. He says that prior to Thales and many years before the men of Aristotle’s time there were some men, the first to speculate about the gods, who seem to have held this opinion about nature, namely, that water is the principle of all things.  

**83**. With a view to making this clear, we must bear in mind that among the Greeks the first who were famous for their learning were certain theological poets, so called because of the songs that they wrote about the gods. These poets, who were three in number—Orpheus, Museus, and Linus (of whom Orpheus was the more famous)—lived during the time when the judges ruled over the Jewish people. Hence it is clear that they lived long before Thales and much longer before Aristotle, who lived during the time of Alexander. These poets dealt to some extent with the nature of things by means of certain figurative representations in myths. For they said that Oceanus, where the greatest aggregation of waters is found, and Tethys, which is the name they gave to the goddess of the waters, are the parents of generation, implying under the form of a myth that water is the principle of generation.  

**84**. They cloaked this view in another fabulous story, saying that the oath or vow of the gods was by a certain body of water, which the poets call Styx and describe as an underground swamp. And when they said that the gods swore by water, they implied that water was nobler than the gods themselves, because an oath or vow is taken on what is most honorable. Now that which is prior is more honorable, for the perfect is prior absolutely to the imperfect, both in nature and in time, although in a particular being imperfection is prior temporally to perfection. Hence, from this it is evident that they thought that water is prior to the gods themselves, whom they thought to be celestial bodies. And since these earliest thinkers said that water is the principle of things, if there was any opinion about natural bodies prior to theirs, we do not know what it was. Thus, what Thales is said to have thought about the first cause of things is now clear.  

**85**. A certain philosopher named Hippo was not credited with adding anything to those mentioned because of the imperfection of his knowledge or understanding. Hence, in *On the Soul*, Hippo is placed among the ruder thinkers; for in that work it is stated that Hippo, basing his argument on the seeds of things (as was said here of Thales), held water to be the soul and principle of things. Hence it is clear that he adds nothing to Thales’ view. Or the statement can mean that, since he spoke imperfectly, he did not make himself worthy to have his doctrine included here with the others.  

**86**. ***Anaximenes and Diogenes*** (984a5). Here he gives the opinions of those who held that air is the principle of things. These were Diogenes and Anaximenes, who held that air is naturally prior to water and is the principle of all simple bodies, that is, of the four elements, and thus of all other things. Anaximenes is the third philosopher after Thales and the disciple of Anaximander, who was the disciple of Thales; Diogenes is said to have been the disciple of Anaximenes. Yet there is this difference between the opinion of Diogenes and that of Anaximenes: Anaximenes held that air is the principle of things in an absolute sense, whereas Diogenes said that air could be the principle of things only if it possessed a divine nature. From this comes the opinion which is touched on in *On the Soul* 1. Now the reason why he held that air is the principle of things could be taken from the process of respiration, by which the life of animals is conserved, and because the processes whereby things are generated and corrupted seem to be modified as a result of changes in the air.  

**87**. ***Hippasus of Metopontium*** (984a7). Here he states that two philosophers, Hippasus and Heraclitus, held that fire is the material principle of things. And they could have been influenced by its subtleness, as is said below.  

**88**. ***Empedocles*** (984a8). Here he gives the opinions of those who posited many material principles.  

First, he gives the opinion of Empedocles, who held that there are a limited number of such principles;  

second [90], that of Anaxagoras, who held that there are an infinite number, at ***Anaxagoras*** (984a11).  

First (984a8), he gives Empedocles’ opinion regarding the three elements mentioned above (water, air, and fire), which he says are the principles of things, adding to them a fourth, earth.  

**89**. Second, he gives Empedocles’ opinion about the permanence of these elements; like those who hold that there is one material cause, he holds that these elements always remain and are neither generated nor corrupted. However, he said that other things are generated from and divided into these elements according as a greater or smaller number of them are combined or separated out (that is, inasmuch as these four are united by the process of combination and lose their unity by the process of separation).  

**90**. ***Anaxagoras*** (984a11). Here he gives the opinion of Anaxagoras, who was the other disciple of Anaximenes and the classmate of Diogenes. A native of Clazomenae, he was prior to Empedocles in years but later in his activity or work, either because he began to philosophize later, or because his explanation of the number of principles is less satisfactory than that of Empedocles. For he said that there are an infinite number of material principles, whereas it is better to take a limited and smaller number, as Empedocles did, as is stated in *Physics* 1.  

For Anaxagoras not only said that fire, water, and the other elements are the principles of things, as Empedocles did, but also claimed that all things having like parts, such as flesh, bones, marrow and so forth, whose smallest parts are infinite in number, are the principles of things. For he claimed that in each being there are an infinite number of parts of each type of thing, because he found that in the case of inferior things one of these can be generated from another. He said, in fact, that things could be generated only by being separated out from a mixture, as Aristotle has explained more fully in *Physics* 1.  

**91**. Second, Anaxagoras also agrees with Empedocles on this point: things are generated and corrupted only insofar as the parts of these infinite principles are combined or separated out, and that if this were not the case nothing would be generated or corrupted. But he said that the infinite number of principles of this kind, from which the substances of things are produced, always remain in being.  

**92**. From the opinions of these philosophers, then, Aristotle concludes that the only cause which these men recognized was the one which belongs to the species of material cause.
