# Lecture 4 — Metaphysics’ distinction from logic

And it is also evident that it is the function of the philosopher to be able to study all things.  

> For if it is not the function of the philosopher, who is it that will investigate whether Socrates and Socrates sitting are the same person, or whether one thing has one contrary, or what a contrary is, or how many meanings it has? And the same applies to other questions of this kind.

> Therefore, since these same things are the essential properties of unity as unity and of being as being, but not as numbers or lines or fire, evidently it is the office of this science to know both the quiddities of these and their accidents.

> Therefore, those who have been studying these things do not err by being unphilosophical, but because substance, to which they pay no attention, is first. Now there are properties of number as number—for example, oddness and evenness, commensurability and equality, excess and defect—and these belong to numbers either in themselves or in relation to one another. And similarly there are properties of the solid, and of what is changeable and what is unchangeable, and of what is heavy and what is light. And in a similar fashion there are properties of being as being; these are the ones about which the philosopher has to investigate the truth.

> An indication of this is the following. Dialecticians and sophists assume the same guise as the philosopher, for sophistry is apparent wisdom, and dialecticians dispute about all things, and being is common to all things. But evidently they dispute about these matters because they are common to philosophy. For sophistry and dialectics are concerned with the same genus of things as philosophy.

> But philosophy differs from the latter in the manner of its power, and from the former in the choice or selection of a way of life. For dialectics is in search of knowledge of what the philosopher actually knows, and sophistry has the semblance of wisdom but is not really such.

> Further, one corresponding member of each pair of contraries is privative, and all contraries are referred to being and to non-being and to unity and to plurality (for example, rest pertains to unity and motion to plurality).

> And almost all men admit that substance and beings are composed of contraries, for all say that principles are contraries. For some speak of the odd and even, others of the hot and cold, others of the limited and unlimited, and others of love and hate.

> And all the other contraries seem to be reducible to unity and plurality. Therefore, let us take that reduction for granted. And all the principles which have to do with other things fall under unity and being as their genera.

> It is clear from these discussions, then, that it is the office of one science to study being as being. For all beings are either contraries or composed of contraries, and the principles of contraries are unity and plurality. And these belong to one science, whether they are used in one sense or not. And perhaps the truth is that they are not.

> Yet even if the term “one” is used in many senses, all will be referred to one primary sense. And the same is true of contraries. Hence, even if unity or being is not a universal and the same in all things or is something separate (as presumably it is not), still in some cases the thing will be referred to unity and in others it will be referred to what follows on unity.

> And for this reason it is not the province of geometry to examine what a contrary is, or what the perfect is, or what unity is, or what sameness or otherness is, but to assume them.

> It is evident, then, that it is the office of one science to study both being as being and the attributes which belong to being as being. And it is evident too that the same science studies not only substances but also their accidents, those mentioned above and prior and subsequent, genus and species, whole and part, and others such as these.

> *General reasons for the difference between metaphysics and dialectics or sophistry*

**570**. Here he uses arguments based on common principles to prove what the philosopher ought to consider regarding all of the foregoing attributes.  

First, he proves his thesis;  

and second (1005a13; [587]), he introduces his intended conclusion, at ***it is evident***.  

In regard to the first part, he does two things.  

First, he proves his thesis;  

and second (1005a11; [586]), he draws a corollary from what has been said, at ***and for this reason***.  

He gives three arguments to prove his thesis.  

The second (1004b17; [572]) begins where he says, ***an indication of this***.  

The third (1004b27; [578]) begins at ***further, one corresponding***.  

The first argument is as follows. All questions that can be raised must be answered by some science. But questions are raised about the common attributes mentioned above—for example, that raised about sameness and otherness (whether Socrates and Socrates sitting are the same), and that raised about contraries (whether one thing has one contrary, and how many meanings the term contrary has). Hence these questions must be answered by some science which considers sameness and contrariety and the other attributes mentioned above.  

**571**. That this is the job of the philosopher and of no one else he proves thus. That science whose office is to consider being as being is the one which must consider the first properties of being. But all of the above-mentioned attributes are proper accidents of unity and being as such. For number as number has properties, such as excess, equality, commensurability, and so on, some of which belong to a number taken absolutely, as even and odd, and some to one number in relation to another, as equality. And even substance has proper attributes, as ***the solid***, or body, and others of this kind. And in a similar way being as being has certain properties, which are the common attributes mentioned above; therefore, the study of them belongs to the philosopher.  

Hence those dealing with philosophy have not erred in their treatment of these things ***by being unphilosophical***, by considering them in a way that does not pertain to the investigations of philosophy, but because in treating them they pay no attention to substance, as though they were completely unmindful of it despite the fact that it is the first thing which the philosopher ought to consider.  

**572**. ***An indication*** (1004b17). Then he gives a second argument to prove the same point. This argument employs an example and runs thus. Dialecticians and sophists assume the same guise as the philosopher inasmuch as they resemble him in some respect. But the dialectician and sophist dispute about the above-mentioned attributes. Therefore, the philosopher should also consider them. In support of his first premise he shows how dialectics and sophistry resemble philosophy and how they differ from it.  

**573**. Dialectics resembles philosophy in that it is also the office of the dialectician to consider all things. But this could not be the case unless he considered all things insofar as they agree in some one respect, because each science has one subject, and each art has one matter on which it operates. Therefore, since all things agree only in being, evidently the subject matter of dialectics is being and those attributes which belong to being. This is what the philosopher also investigates. And sophistry likewise resembles philosophy, for sophistry has ***the semblance of wisdom***, or is apparent wisdom, without being wisdom. Now anything that takes on the appearance of something else must resemble it in some way. Therefore, the philosopher, the dialectician, and the sophist must consider the same thing.  

**574**. Yet they differ from each other. The philosopher differs from the dialectician in power, because the consideration of the philosopher is more efficacious than that of the dialectician. For the philosopher proceeds demonstratively in dealing with the common attributes mentioned above, and thus it is proper to him to have scientific knowledge of these attributes. And he actually knows them with certitude, for certain or scientific knowledge is the effect of demonstration.  

The dialectician, however, proceeds to treat all of the above-mentioned common attributes from probable premises, and thus he does not acquire scientific knowledge of them, but a kind of opinion.  

The reason for this difference is that there are two kinds of beings: beings of reason and real beings.  

The expression “being of reason” is applied properly to those notions which reason derives from the objects it considers—for example, the notions of genus, species, and the like, which are not found in reality but are a natural result of the consideration of reason. And this kind of being (a being of reason) constitutes the proper subject of logic.  

But intellectual conceptions of this kind are equal in extension to real beings, because all real beings fall under the consideration of reason. Hence the subject of logic extends to all things to which the expression “real being” is applied. His conclusion is, then, that the subject of logic is equal in extension to the subject of philosophy, which is real being.  

Now the philosopher proceeds from the principles of this kind of being to prove the things that have to be considered about the common accidents of this kind of being. But the dialectician proceeds to consider them from the conceptions of reason, which are extrinsic to reality. Hence it is said that dialectics is in search of knowledge, because in searching it is proper to proceed from extrinsic principles.  

**575**. But the philosopher differs from the sophist ***in the choice***, that is, in the selection, willing, or desire of a way of life. For the philosopher and sophist direct their life and actions to different things. The philosopher directs his to knowing the truth, whereas the sophist directs his so as to appear to know what he does not.  

**576**. Now, although it is said that philosophy is scientific knowledge, and that dialectics and sophistry are not, this still does not do away with the possibility of dialectics and sophistry being sciences.  

For dialectics can be considered both from the viewpoint of theory and from that of practice. From the viewpoint of theory it studies these conceptions and establishes the method by which one proceeds from them to demonstrate with probability the conclusions of the particular sciences. It does this demonstratively, and to this extent it is a science.  

But from the viewpoint of practice it makes use of the above method so as to reach certain probable conclusions in the particular sciences, and in this respect it falls short of the scientific method.  

The same must be said of sophistry, because, from the viewpoint of theory, it treats by means of necessary and demonstrative arguments the method of arguing to apparent truth. From the viewpoint of practice, however, it falls short of the process of true argumentation.  

**577**. But that part of logic which is said to be demonstrative is concerned only with theory, and the practical application of it belongs to philosophy and to the other particular sciences, which are concerned with real beings.  

This is because the practical aspect of the demonstrative part of logic consists in using the principles of things, from which proceeds demonstration (which properly belongs to the sciences that deal with real beings), and not in using the conceptions of logic.  

Thus it appears that some parts of logic are at the same time scientific, theoretical, and practical, as exploratory dialectics and sophistry; and one is concerned with theory and not practice, namely, demonstrative logic.  

**578**. ***Further, one corresponding*** (1004b27). Then he gives the third argument in support of his thesis. It runs as follows. Everything that is reducible to unity and being should be considered by the philosopher, whose function is to study unity and being. But all contraries are reducible to unity and being. Therefore, all contraries belong to the consideration of the philosopher, whose function is to study unity and being.  

**579**. Then he proves that all contraries are reducible to unity and being. He first does this with regard to being, and he proceeds thus.  

Of any two contraries which the philosophers posited as the principles of things, as is said in book 1 (986b2; [132]), one contrary is always the correlative of the other and is related to it as its privation. This is clear from the fact that one of two contraries is always something imperfect when compared with the other, and thus implies some privation of the perfection of the other. But a privation is a kind of negation, as was stated above (1004a9; [564]), and thus is a non-being. Hence it is clear that all contraries are reducible to being and non-being.  

**580**. He also shows by an example that all contraries are reducible to unity and plurality. For rest or repose is reducible to unity, since that is said to be at rest which is in the same condition now as it was before, as is stated in *Physics* 6. And motion is reducible to plurality, because whatever is in motion is in a different condition now than it was before, and this implies plurality.  

**581**. ***And almost all*** (1004b29). Then he uses another argument to show that contraries are reducible to being. Both the principles of things and the things composed of them belong to the same study. But the philosophers admit that contraries are the principles of being as being, for all say that beings and the substances of beings are composed of contraries, as was stated in *Physics* 1 and book 1 (986b2; [132]) of this work.  

Yet while they agree on this point—that the principles of beings are contraries—still they differ as to the contraries which they give. For some give the even and odd, as the Pythagoreans. Others, the hot and cold, as Parmenides. Others, ***the limited***, or terminus, ***and the unlimited***, that is, the finite and infinite, as did the same Pythagoreans, for they attributed limitedness and unlimitedness to the even and the odd, as is stated in book 1 (986a13; [124]). Still others gave friendship and strife, as Empedocles. Hence it is clear that contraries are reducible to the study of being.  

**582**. ***And all the other*** (1004b33). He says that the above-mentioned contraries are reducible not only to being but also to unity and plurality. This is evident. For oddness by reason of its indivisibility is affiliated with unity, and evenness by reason of its divisibility has a natural connection with plurality. Thus, end or limit pertains to unity, which is the terminus of every process of resolution, and lack of limit pertains to plurality, which may be increased to infinity. Again, friendship also clearly pertains to unity, and strife to plurality. And heat pertains to unity inasmuch as it can unite homogeneous things, whereas cold pertains to plurality inasmuch as it can separate them. Further, not only these contraries are reducible in this way to unity and plurality, but so also are the others. Yet let us now accept or ***take for granted*** (that is, let us now assume) this ***reduction***, or introduction, to unity and plurality; to examine each set of contraries would be a lengthy undertaking.  

**583**. Next he shows that all contraries are reducible to unity and being. For it is certain that all principles, inasmuch as they have to do ***with other things***, that is, the things composed of them, fall under unity and being as their genera, not in the sense that they truly are genera, but in the sense that they bear some likeness to genera by reason of what they have in common. Hence, if all contraries are principles or things composed of principles, they must be reducible to unity and being.  

Thus it is clear that he shows that contraries are reducible to being for two reasons:  

first, because of the nature of privation;  

second, by reason of the fact that contraries are principles.  

He shows that they are reducible to unity by giving an example and by using a process of reduction.  

Last, he shows that they are reducible to unity and being inasmuch as they have the character of genera.  

**584**. ***It is clear*** (1005a2). Here he proves in a converse way that this science considers being because it considers the things mentioned above. His argument is this. All beings are reducible to contraries because they are either contraries or composed of contraries. And contraries are reducible to unity and plurality because unity and plurality are the principles of contraries. But unity and plurality belong to one science, philosophy. Therefore, it is the office of this science to consider being as being.  

Yet it must be noted that all the contraries mentioned above fall under the consideration of one science whether they are used ***in one sense***, that is, univocally, or not (as perhaps is the case). However, even if the term “one” is used in many senses, all the others (that is, all the other senses) are reducible to one primary sense. And the case is similar with contraries, which are said in many ways, yet all their significations are reduced to the first one.  

Hence, even if unity or being is not one universal, like a genus, as was stated above (whether a universal is said to be a one-in-all, as we maintain, or something separate from things, as Plato thought, and as is presumably not the case), still each is used in a primary and a secondary sense. And the same holds true in the case of other terms, for some senses are referred to one primary sense, and others are secondary with respect to that primary sense. An adverb designating uncertainty is used inasmuch as we are now assuming things that will be proved below.  

**585**. But nevertheless it must be borne in mind that the statement which he made—all beings are either contraries or composed of contraries—he did not give as his own opinion but as one which he took from the ancient philosophers. For unchangeable beings are not contraries or composed of contraries. And this is why Plato did not posit any contrariety in the unchangeable sensible substances, for he attributed unity to form and contrariety to matter. But the ancient philosophers claimed that only sensible substances exist and that these must contain contrariety inasmuch as they are changeable.  

**586**. ***And for this reason*** (1005a11). Then he draws a corollary from what has been said. He says that it is not the province of geometry to investigate the foregoing things, which are accidents of being as being—for example, to investigate what a contrary is, or what the perfect is, and so on.  

But if a geometer were to consider them, he would ***assume them***, or presuppose their truth, inasmuch as he would take them over from some prior philosopher from whom he accepts them insofar as they are necessary for his own subject matter. What is said about geometry must be understood to apply also in the case of any other particular science.  

**587**. ***It is evident*** (1005a13). He now summarizes the points established above. He says that obviously the consideration of being as being and the attributes which belong to it of itself pertain to one science. Thus it is clear that that science considers not only substances but also accidents, since being is predicated of both. And it considers the things that have been discussed, which we said above are the proper accidents of being—namely, sameness and otherness, likeness and unlikeness, equality and inequality, privation and negation, and contraries. And it considers not only those things that fall under the consideration of this science, about which demonstration was made individually by means of arguments based on proper principles, but it in like manner also considers prior and subsequent, genus and species, whole and part, and other things of this kind, because these too are accidents of being as being.
