# Lecture 20 — “Disposition,” “having,” “affection,” “privation,” and “to have”

“Disposition” means the order of what has parts, either as to place or as to potency or as to species. For there must be a certain position, as the term disposition itself makes clear.  

> “Having” means in one sense a certain action of the haver and of what is had, as a sort of act or motion. For when one thing makes and another is made, the making is intermediate. And likewise between one having clothing and the clothing had, the having is intermediate.

> It is accordingly clear that it is not reasonable to have a having; for if it were possible to have the having of what is had, this would go on to infinity.

> In another sense, “having” means a certain disposition whereby the thing disposed is well or badly disposed, in relation either to itself or to something else—for example, health is a sort of having and is such a disposition.

> Again, the term “having” is used if there is a part of such a disposition. And for this reason any virtue pertaining to the powers of the soul is a sort of having.

> “Passion” means, in one sense, the quality according to which alteration occurs, as white and black, sweet and bitter, heavy and light, and all other such attributes. And in another sense, it means the actualizations and alterations of these; of these, particularly harmful operations and motions, most especially those which are painful and injurious. Again, great rejoicing and grieving are called passions.

> The term “privation” is used in one sense when a thing does not have one of those attributes which it is suitable for some things to have, even though that particular thing would not naturally have it. In this sense, a plant is said to be deprived of eyes.

> And it is used in another sense when a thing is naturally disposed to have something, either in itself or according to its genus, and does not have it. A man and a mole, for example, are deprived of sight, but in different ways: the latter according to its genus and the former in itself.

> Again, we speak of privation when a thing is by nature such as to have a certain perfection and does not have it even when it is naturally disposed to have it.

> For blindness is a privation, although a man is not blind at every age but only if he does not have sight at the age when he is naturally disposed to have it.

> And similarly, we speak of privation when a thing does not have what it is naturally disposed to have, in reference to where, and to what part, and to the object in relation to which, and in the manner in which it may have it.

> Again, the removal of anything by force is called a privation.

> And in all instances in which negations are expressed by the privative particle, *(In English, privatives can be signified by un- or in- (for example, “incapable” or “unfit”).)* privations are expressed. For a thing is said to be unequal because it does not have the equality which it is naturally fitted to have.

> And a thing is said to be invisible either because it has no color at all or because its color is deficient, and a thing is said to be footless either because it lacks feet altogether or because its feet are imperfect.

> Again, we use the term “privation” of a thing when it has something to a very small degree—for example, “unfired”—and this means to have it in a deficient way.

> And “privation” also designates what is not had easily or well. For example, a thing is uncuttable not only because it cannot be cut, but because it cannot be cut easily or well.

> And we use the term “privation” of what is not had in any way. For it is not only a one-eyed man that is said to be blind, but one who lacks sight in both eyes. And for this reason, not every man is good or bad, just or unjust, but there is an intermediate state.

> “To have” has many meanings.

> In one sense it means to treat something according to one’s own nature or to one’s own impulse. For this reason a fever is said to possess a man, and tyrants are said to possess cities, and people who are clothed are said to possess clothing.

> And in another sense a thing is said to have something when this is present in the subject which receives it. Thus bronze has the form of a statue, and a body of disease.

> And whatever contains something else is said to have or to hold it, for that which is contained is said to be held by the container. For example, we say that a bottle holds a liquid, and a city men, and a ship sailors. It is in this way too that a whole has parts.

> Again, whatever prevents a thing from moving or from acting according to its own impulse is said to hold it, as pillars hold the weight imposed on them. It is in this sense that the poets make Atlas hold the heavens (as if otherwise it would fall on the earth, as certain of the physicists also say). And it is in this sense that that which holds something together is said to hold what it holds together, because otherwise it would be separated, each according to its own impulse. And to be in something is expressed in a similar way and corresponds to the meanings of “to have.”

> *“Disposition”*

**1058**. Because the phrase “according to which” signifies in one sense position, the Philosopher therefore proceeds to examine next [1058] the term “disposition.” He gives the common meaning of this term, saying that a disposition is nothing else than the order of parts in a thing which has parts. He also gives the senses in which the term “disposition” is used; and there are three of these.  

The first designates the order of parts in place, and in this sense disposition or posture is a special category.  

**1059**. “Disposition” is used in a second sense inasmuch as the order of parts is considered in reference to potency or active power, and then disposition is placed in the first species of quality. For a thing is said to be disposed in this sense—for example, according to health or sickness—because its parts have an order in its active or passive power.  

**1060**. “Disposition” is used in a third sense according as the order of parts is considered in reference to the form and figure of the whole; then disposition or position is held to be a difference in the genus of quantity. For it is said that one kind of quantity has position (like line, surface, body, and place), but that another has not (like number and time).  

**1061**. He also points out that the term “disposition” signifies order, for it signifies position, as the derivation itself of the term makes clear, and order is involved in the notion of position.  

**1062**. ***“**Having” means*** (1022b4). He now proceeds to examine the term “having.”  

First, he gives the different senses of the term “having.”  

Second (1022b15; [1065]), he gives the different senses of certain other terms which are closely connected with this one, at ***“passion” means***.  

He accordingly first gives the two senses in which the term “having” is used.  

First, it designates something intermediate between the haver and the thing had. Now even though having is not an action, nonetheless it signifies something after the manner of an action.  

Therefore, “having” is understood to be something intermediate between the haver and the thing had and to be a sort of action, just as heating is understood to be something intermediate between the thing being heated and the heater, whether what is intermediate be taken as an action (as when heating is taken in an active sense), or as a motion (as when heating is taken in a passive sense).  

For when one thing makes and another is made, the making stands between them. In Greek, the term *poiesis* is used, and this signifies making. Moreover, if one goes from the agent to the patient, the intermediate is making in an active sense, and this is the action of the maker.  

But if one goes from the thing made to the maker, then the intermediate is making in a passive sense, and this is the motion of the thing being made.  

And between a man having clothing and the clothing had, the having is also an intermediate, for if we consider it by going from the man to his clothing, it will be like an action, as is expressed under the form “to have.” But if we consider it in the opposite way, it will be like the undergoing of a motion, as is expressed under the form “to be had.”  

**1063**. Now, although having is understood to be intermediate between a man and his clothing inasmuch as he has it, nonetheless it is evident that there cannot be another intermediate between the having and the thing had, as though there were another having midway between the haver and the intermediate having.  

For if one were to say that it is possible to have the having ***of what is had*** (that is, of the thing had), an infinite regress would then result. For the man has ***the thing had***, his clothing, but he does not have the having of the thing had by way of another intermediate having. It is like the case of a maker, who makes the thing made by an intermediate making, but does not make the intermediate making itself by way of some other intermediate making.  

It is for this reason too that the relations by which a subject is related to something else are not related to the subject by some other intermediate relation and also not to the opposite term. Paternity, for example, is not related to a father or to a son by some other intermediate relation. And if some relations are said to be intermediate, they are merely conceptual relations and not real ones. “Having” in this sense is taken as one of the categories.  

**1064**. In a second sense, the term “having” means the disposition whereby something is well or badly disposed—for example, a thing is well disposed by health and badly disposed by sickness. Now by each of these, health and sickness, a thing is well or badly disposed in two ways: either in itself or in relation to something else. Thus a healthy thing is one that is well disposed in itself, and a robust thing is one that is well disposed for doing something. Health is a kind of having, then, because it is a disposition such as has been described.  

And “having,” or “habit,” designates not only the disposition of a whole but also that of a part, which is a part of the disposition of the whole. For example, the good dispositions of an animal’s parts are themselves parts of the good disposition of the whole animal.  

The virtues pertaining to the parts of the soul are also habits. For example, temperance is a habit of the concupiscible part, fortitude a habit of the irascible part, and prudence a habit of the rational part.  

**1065**. ***Passion***. Here he proceeds to treat the terms which are associated with “having.”  

First, he deals with those which are associated as an opposite;  

and second (1023a8; [1080]), he considers something which is related to it as an effect, namely, “to have,” which derives its name from “having,” at ***“to have” has many meanings***.  

Now there is something which is opposed to having as the imperfect is opposed to the perfect, and this is “passion” (being affected). And “privation” is opposed by direct opposition.  

Hence, first [1065], he deals with passion;  

second (1022b22; [1070]), with privation, at ***the term “privation***.***”***  

He accordingly first gives four senses of the term “passion.”  

In one sense it means the quality according to which alteration takes place, such as white and black and the like. And this is the third species of quality, for it has been proved in *Physics* 7 that there can be alteration only in the third species of quality.  

**1066**. “Passion” is used in another sense according as the actualizations of this kind of quality and alteration, which comes about through them, are called passions. And in this sense “passion” is one of the categories (for example, being heated and cooled and other motions of this kind).  

**1067**. In a third sense, “passion” means not any kind of alteration at all, but those which are harmful and terminate in some evil, and which are lamentable or sorrowful, for a thing is not said to suffer insofar as it is healed, but insofar as it is made ill. Or it also designates anything harmful that befalls anything at all, and with good reason. For a patient, by the action of some agent which is contrary to it, is drawn from its own natural disposition to one similar to that of the agent. Hence, a patient is said more properly to suffer when some part of something fitting to it is being removed while its disposition is being changed into a contrary one rather than when the reverse occurs. For then it is said rather to be perfected.  

**1068**. And because things that are not very great are considered as nothing, therefore, in a fourth sense, “passion” means not any kind of harmful alteration whatsoever, but those which are extremely injurious, as great calamities and great sorrows. And because excessive pleasure becomes harmful (for sometimes people have died or become ill as a result of it), and because too great prosperity is turned into something harmful to those who do not know how to make good use of it, therefore another text reads ***great rejoicing and grieving are called passions***. And still another text agrees with this, saying, ***very great sorrows and prosperities***.  

**1069**. Now it should be noted that because these three—“disposition,” “habit” or “having,” and “passion”—signify one of the categories only in one of the senses in which they are used, as is evident from what was said above, he therefore did not place them with the other parts of being (quantity, quality, and relation). For either all or most of the senses in which they were used pertained to the category signified by these terms.  

**1070**. ***The term “privation”*** (1022b22). Here he gives the different senses in which the term “privation” is used.  

And since privation includes in its intelligible structure both negation and the fitness of some subject to possess some attribute, he therefore first gives the different senses of “privation” which refer to this fitness or aptitude for some attribute.  

Second (1022b33; [1074]), he treats the various senses of negation, at ***and in all instances***.  

In regard to the first he gives four senses of “privation.”  

The first has to do with this natural fitness taken in reference to the attribute of which the subject is deprived, and not in reference to the subject itself. For we speak of a privation in this sense when some attribute which is naturally fitted to be had is not had, even though the subject which lacks it is not designed by nature to have it.  

For example, a plant is said to be deprived of eyes because eyes are naturally designed to be had by something, although not by a plant.  

But in the case of those attributes which a subject is not naturally fitted to have, the subject cannot be said to be deprived of them—for example, that the eye by its power of vision should penetrate an opaque body.  

**1071**. A second sense of the term “privation” is noted in reference to a subject’s fitness to have some attribute. For in this sense, “privation” refers only to some attribute which a thing is naturally fitted to have either ***in itself*** or ***according to its genus***.  

An example of having it ***in itself*** is when a blind person is said to be deprived of sight, which he is naturally fitted to have in himself. And a mole is said to be deprived of sight not because it is naturally fitted to have it, but because the genus, animal, to which the mole belongs, is so fitted.  

For there are many attributes which a thing is not prevented from having by reason of its genus, but by reason of its differences—for example, a man is not prevented from having wings by reason of his genus, but by reason of his difference.  

**1072**. A third sense of the term “privation” is noted in reference to circumstances. And in this sense a thing is said to be deprived of something if it does not have it when it is ***naturally disposed to have it***. This is the case, for example, with the privation “blindness,” for an animal is not said to be blind ***at every age***, but only if it does not have sight at an age when it is naturally disposed to have it. Hence a dog is not said to be blind before the ninth day.  

And what is true of the circumstance of “when” also applies to other circumstances, as ***to where***, or place. Thus “night” means the privation of light in a place where light may naturally exist, but not in caverns, which the sun’s rays cannot penetrate.  

And it applies ***to what part***, as a man is not said to be toothless if he does not have teeth in his hand, but only if he does not have them in that part in which they are naturally disposed to exist; and ***to the object in relation to which***, as a man is not said to be small or imperfect in stature if he is not large in comparison with a mountain or with any other thing with which he is not naturally comparable in size. Hence a man is not said to be slow in moving if he does not run as fast as a hare or move as fast as the wind; nor is he said to be ignorant if he does not understand as God does.  

**1073**. “Privation” is used in a fourth sense inasmuch as ***the removal of anything by violence*** is called a privation. For what is forced is contrary to natural impulse, as has been said above [829]; thus ***the* *removal of anything by violence*** has reference to something that a person is naturally fitted to have.  

**1074**. ***And in all*** (1022b33). Then he gives the different senses of “privation” which involve negation: for the Greeks use the prefix *a*- or *an*- when compounding words to designate negations and privations, just as we use the prefix *in*- or *un*-. Therefore, he says that in every case in which one expresses negations designated by the prefix *a*- or *an*-, used in composition at the beginning of a word, privations are designated. For “unequal” means in one sense what lacks equality, provided that it is naturally such as to have it; and “invisible” means what lacks color; and “footless” means what lacks feet.  

**1075**. Negations of this kind are used in a second sense to indicate not what is not had at all but what is had badly or in an ugly way. For example, a thing is said to be colorless because it has a bad or unfitting color, and a thing is said to be footless because it has defective or deformed feet.  

**1076**. In a third sense an attribute is signified privatively or negatively because it is had to a small degree. For example, the term *apirenon* (unignited) is used in the Greek text, and it signifies a situation where the smallest amount of fire exists. And in a way, this sense is contained under the second, because to have something to a small degree is in a way to have it defectively or unfittingly.  

**1077**. Something is designated as a privation or negation in a fourth sense because it is not done easily or well; for example, something is said to be uncuttable not only because it is not cut, but because it is not cut easily or well.  

**1078**. And something is designated as a privation or negation in a fifth sense because it is not had in any way at all. Hence it is not a one-eyed person who is said to be blind, but one who lacks sight in both eyes.  

**1079**. From this he draws a corollary, namely, that there is some intermediate between good and evil, between just and unjust. For a person does not become evil when he lacks goodness to any degree at all, as the Stoics said (for they held all sins to be equal), but when he deviates widely from virtue and is brought to a contrary habit. Hence it is said in *Ethics* 2 that a man is not to be blamed for deviating a little from virtue.  

**1080**. ***“To have”*** (1023a8). Then he gives four ways in which the term “to have” (to possess or hold) is used:  

first, to have a thing is to treat it according to one’s own nature in the case of natural things, or according to one’s own impulse in the case of voluntary matters. Thus a fever is said to possess a man because he is brought from a normal state to one of fever. And in the same sense, tyrants are said to possess cities, because civic business is carried out according to the will and impulse of tyrants. And in this sense too those who are clothed are said to possess or have clothing, because clothing is fitted to the one who wears it so that it takes on his figure. And to have possession of a thing is also reduced to this sense of “to have,” because anything that a man possesses he uses as he wills.  

**1081**. “To have” is used in a second way inasmuch as that in which some attribute exists as its proper subject is said to have it. It is in this sense that bronze has the form of a statue, and a body has disease. And to have a science or quantity or any accident or form is included under this sense.  

**1082**. “To have” is used in a third way (to hold) when a container is said to have or to hold the thing contained, and the thing contained is said to be held by the container.  

For example, we say that a bottle has or ***holds a liquid*** (that is, some fluid) such as water or wine, and that a city has men, and a ship, sailors. It is in this sense too that a whole is said to have parts, for a whole contains a part just as a place contains the thing in place. But a place differs from a whole in this respect: a place may be separated from the thing which occupies it, whereas a whole may not be separated from its parts. Hence, anything that occupies a place is like a separate part, as is said in *Physics* 4.  

**1083**. “To have” is used in a fourth way (to hold up) inasmuch as one thing is said to hold another because it prevents it from operating or being moved according to its own impulse.  

It is in this sense that pillars are said to hold up the heavy bodies placed upon them, because they prevent these bodies from falling down in accordance with their own inclination. And in this sense too the poets said that Atlas holds up the heavens, for the poets supposed Atlas to be a giant who prevents the heavens from falling on the earth.  

And certain natural philosophers also say this, holding that the heavens will at some time be corrupted and fall in dissolution upon the earth. This is most evident in the opinions expressed by Empedocles, for he held that the world is destroyed an infinite number of times and comes into being an infinite number of times. And the fables of the poets have some basis in reality, for Atlas, who was a great astronomer, made an accurate study of the motion of the celestial bodies, and from this arose the story that he holds up the heavens.  

But this sense of the term “to have” differs from the first. For, according to the first, as was seen, the thing having compels the thing had to follow by reason of its own impulse, and thus is the cause of forced motion.  

But here the thing having prevents the thing had from being moved by its own natural motion, and thus is the cause of forced rest.  

The third sense of “having,” according to which a container is said to have or hold the thing contained, is reduced to this sense, because the individual parts of the thing contained would be separated from each other by their own peculiar impulse if the container did not prevent this. This is clear, for example, in the case of a bottle containing water, inasmuch as the bottle prevents the parts of the water from being separated.  

**1084**. In closing he says that the phrase ***to be in*** a thing is used in the same way as “to have,” and the ways of being in a thing correspond to those of having a thing. Now the eight ways of being in a thing have been treated in *Physics* 4.  

Two of these are as follows: that in which an integral whole is in its parts, and the reverse of this.  

Two others are the way in which a universal whole is in its parts, and vice versa.  

And another is that in which a thing in place is in a place, and this corresponds to the third sense of “having,” according to which a whole has parts, and a place has the thing which occupies it.  

But the way in which a thing is said to be in something as in an efficient cause or mover (as the things belonging to a kingdom are in the king) corresponds to the first sense of “having” given here [1080].  

And the way in which a thing is in an end or goal is reduced to the fourth sense of “having” given here [1083], or also to the first, because those things that are related to an end are moved or at rest because of it.
