# Lecture 17 — Nature as a principle and cause

But let us state both what we must say substance is and what kind of thing, as though we were making a fresh start. For perhaps, from these things, we shall come to an understanding of that kind of substance which is separate from sensible substances. Hence, since substance is a principle and cause, let us proceed from this starting point.  

> Now the why of a thing is always investigated in the following way: why does one thing belong to something else? For to ask why a musical man is a musical man is either to ask why the man is musical or to ask about something else (as has been said). Therefore, to ask why a thing is itself is to make no inquiry at all, for both a thing’s existence and the fact that it is such must be evident from the first. (I mean, for example, that the moon undergoes an eclipse.)

> And in the case of all things, there is one reason and one cause of the fact that a thing is itself, for example, why a man is a man, or why the musical is musical—unless one were to say that each thing is indivisible in relation to itself. But this is what being one really is. However, this is common to all things and is small. But someone might ask, “Why is man such and such an animal?” This, then, is evident, that he is not asking why he who is a man is a man.

> Therefore, one is asking why something is predicated of something else; for if this were not so, the inquiry would be about nothing—for example, “why does it thunder?” The answer is, “Because sound is produced in the clouds.”

> For what is being investigated is one thing as predicated in this way of something else. “Why are these things—such as bricks and stones—a house?” It is evident, then, that he is asking about the cause. And this—to speak logically—is the quiddity.

> Now, in the case of some things, this is that for the sake of which a thing exists, as, say, in the case of a house or a bed. But, in the case of other things, it is the thing which first moves them, for this also is a cause. Such a cause is sought in the process of generation and corruption, while the other is also sought in the case of being.

> Now, the object of our inquiry is most obscure in cases concerned with things not predicated of others, as when we ask what man is, because a single term is used and it is not said definitely that he is this or that.

> But corrections must be sought here, for if this is not done, it will turn out that asking something and asking nothing will have something in common. But, since it is necessary to assume that the thing exists, it is clear that the question is why the matter is such and such.

> For example, “why are these materials a house?” Because these are the ones that constitute the being of a house. And “why is this individual a man?” or “why is a thing having such and such a body a man?”

> Hence what is being sought is the cause of the matter, and this is the species by reason of which something exists. This is substance.

> Hence, it is evident that there is no inquiry or teaching as regards simple things, but that there is a different method of investigating such things.

> Now, what is composed is composed of something in such a way that everything is one, though not as a heap of things, but as a syllable is. But a syllable is not the same as its letters—*BA* is not the same as the letters *B* and *A*. Neither is flesh the same as fire and earth. When these are dissociated, they no longer exist (for example, flesh and the like), but the elements exist, both fire and earth.

> Hence a syllable is a determinate thing, and not merely the elements of speech, as the vowel and the consonant, but something else as well. And flesh is not merely fire and earth, or the hot and the cold, but something else as well.

> Therefore, if something must either be an element or composed of elements, then, if it is an element, the same argument will again apply; for flesh will consist of this and fire and earth and something else besides, so that there will be an infinite regress.

> But if it is composed of elements, it is evident that it is not composed of one (otherwise it would be that very thing itself), but of many. Hence we use the same argument in this case as we did in that of a syllable or of flesh.

> Now it would seem that this something else exists and that it is an element and the cause of being; in other words, that it is the cause of this being flesh and of this being a syllable. It is similar in other cases. But this element is the substance of each thing and the first cause of being.

> And since certain things are not substances, although all those which are according to nature and are constituted such by nature are substances, it is evident that, in some cases, this substance is a nature which is not an element, but a principle. Now an element is something into which a thing is divided and which is intrinsic as matter. For example, *A* and *B* are the elements of a syllable.

> **1648**. At the beginning of this seventh book, the Philosopher had promised that he would treat of the substance of sensible things in the sense of their essence, which he has explained from the viewpoint of logic by showing that those attributes which are predicated *per se* pertain to the whatness of a thing, since it was not yet evident what it is that constitutes substance in the sense of essence. Now, the Platonists said that this substance is the universals, which are separate forms. But this doctrine Aristotle rejected immediately above. Hence, it remained for him to show what substance, in the sense of essence, really is. And in order to do this, he also sets down as a premise that substance in the sense of essence has the character of a principle and cause. This is the purpose of this chapter. Hence, it is divided into two parts.

In the first (1042a3; [1648]), he explains what his aim is.  

In the second (1041a10; [1649]), he proceeds to carry out his aim, at ***now the why***.  

He accordingly first says (1041a6) that, since it has been shown that no universal predicate is a substance, as the Platonists claimed, let us state what the real truth of the matter is about ***substance*** (namely, that which is essence), ***and what kind of thing*** this substance is (namely, whether it is form or matter or something of this kind).  

He says, ***let us state***, as if we were introducing or announcing a starting point different from the logical one with which we began in the beginning of this seventh book to investigate the above-mentioned substance. ***For perhaps, from these things***, which are to be said about the quiddities of sensible substances, ***we shall come to an understanding of that kind of substance which is separate from sensible substance***. For even though separate substances are not of the same species as sensible ones, as the Platonists claimed, a knowledge of these sensible substances is still the road by which we reach a knowledge of those separate substances.  

And he adds what that other starting point is from which one must enter upon the proposed investigation. He says that one must proceed from this starting point in order to show what the above-mentioned kind of substance is, so that we may understand that, in substance itself, there is a principle and cause.  

**1649**. ***Now the why*** (1041a10). Here he shows that substance in the sense of essence is a principle and cause, and in regard to this, he does two things.  

First (1041a10), he shows that it is a principle and cause.  

Second (1041b11; [1672]), he shows what kind of principle it is, at ***now, what is composed***.  

In regard to the first, he does two things.  

First, he explains his aim.  

Second (1041a32; [1662]), he rejects an interpretation which could seem opposed to the argument he has given, at ***now, the object***.  

Now, the point of his argument is as follows. Whatever is such that one does not ask why it is, but is that to which the other things under investigation are reduced, must be a principle and cause. For the question “Why?” is a question about a cause. But substance in the sense of essence is a thing of this kind, for one does not ask why man is man, but why man is something else (and it is the same in other cases). Therefore, the substance of a thing in the sense of its essence is a principle and cause.  

**1650**. Hence he first says (1041a10) that ***the why of a thing is always investigated in the following way***. In other words, we use the question “Why?” when we ask why one thing belongs to something else, and not why a thing is itself. ***For to ask why a musical man is a musical man is either to ask why the man is musical or to ask about something else (as has been said)***. This is equivalent to saying that, when we ask why a musical man is a musical man, this question can be interpreted in two ways.  

First, that the thing which has been stated and posited is under investigation—that is, the thing being investigated (namely, the whole musical man) is asked about the whole musical man.  

Second, that one thing is asked about another; that is, it is asked about a musical man not why he is a man, but why he is musical.  

**1651**. And he immediately rejects the first interpretation, saying that to ask why a thing is itself—for example, why man is man—is to make no inquiry at all. For every time we ask the question why, there must be something which is evident and something which is not evident and has to be investigated. For there are four questions which may be asked, as is stated in *Posterior Analytics* 2: namely, “is it?,” “what is it?,” “is it a fact that it is such?,” and “why is it such?” Now two of these questions—namely, “what is it?” and “why is it such?”—basically coincide, as is proved in that work. And just as the question “what is it?” is related to the question “is it?” so too the question “why is it such?” is related to the question “is it a fact that it is such?”  

Hence, when one asks the question why, these two points must be evident; for inasmuch as the question “why is it such?” bears on the same point as the question “what is it?” the fact of the thing’s existence must be evident. And inasmuch as the question “why is it such?” is distinguished from the question “what is it?” the fact that it is such must be evident.  

Hence, he says that, when one asks why, these two things must be evident: its existence—which pertains to the question “is it?”—and the fact that it is such. For example, when we ask, “why does the moon undergo an eclipse?,” it must be evident that the moon does undergo an eclipse; for if this were not evident, it would be pointless to inquire why this is so. And by the same reasoning, when one asks “what is man?” it must be evident that man exists. But this could not happen if one were to ask why a thing is itself, for example, “why is man man?” or “why is the musical musical?” For in knowing that a man is a man, it is known why he is a man.  

**1652**. For in the case of all things, there is one reason and one cause which cannot remain unknown, just as other common notions, which are called the common conceptions of the intellect, cannot remain unknown. And the reason is that each is one with itself. Hence, each is predicated of itself.  

**1653**. Now, it might be that someone should want to give another cause, saying that the reason a man is a man, and the musical is musical, and so on in other cases, is that each is indivisible in relation to itself; and thus it cannot be denied of itself such that we should say that a man is not a man. Hence, it must be affirmed of itself. But this argument does not differ from the first which we gave, namely, that each thing is one with itself. For ***this is what being one really is***; that is, we maintained above that unity signifies indivisibility. Therefore, it is the same thing to say that each thing is one with itself and that it is indivisible in relation to itself.  

**1654**. But, even supposing that this argument differed from the preceding one, this too is still a characteristic common to all things, namely, that each thing is indivisible in relation to itself ***and is small***, that is, it has the nature of a principle, which is small in size and great in power. Hence, one cannot inquire about it as about something unknown, any more than about other common principles. Another translation reads, ***and it is like a tone***, as if to say that it is in harmony with the truth in all things. But another text has ***and it is true***, and we must understand by this ***self-evident***. Thus it is obvious that there can be no investigation as to why a thing is itself.  

**1655**. It follows, then, that one always asks why this thing is something else. Hence, he makes this clear next. He says that, if someone were to ask, “why is man such and such an animal?” it is evident that he is not asking why man is man. Thus, it is clear that he is asking why one thing is predicated of something else, and not why the same thing is predicated of itself. But, when someone asks why something is predicated of something else, the fact that it exists must be evident; ***for if this were not so***, if it were not evident that it existed, ***the inquiry would be about nothing***, for one is possibly inquiring about what is not.  

Or it may be taken in another way as referring to the point mentioned before; ***for if this were not so***, that is, if one did not inquire about one thing as predicated of something else, but as predicated of itself, ***the inquiry would be about nothing***, as has been shown.  

**1656**. Now, in asking the why of something, sometimes we are asking about the cause taken as form in matter. Hence, when we ask, “why does it thunder?” the answer is, “because sound is produced in the clouds.” For here it is clear that what is being asked is one thing of another, for sound is in the clouds, or thunder in the air.  

**1657**. But sometimes we are asking about the cause of the form in the matter, either the efficient cause or final cause; for when we ask “why are these materials (bricks and stones) a house?,” the question concerns one thing as predicated of something else, namely, bricks and stones of a house. Hence the Philosopher did not say without qualification that the question is “what is a house?” but, “why are things of this kind a house?” It is evident, then, that this question asks about a cause.  

**1658**. Now, the cause which he has been investigating is the essence, logically speaking. For the logician considers the way in which terms are predicated, and not the existence of a thing. Hence he says that whatever answer is given to the question “what is this thing?” pertains to the quiddity, whether it is intrinsic (as matter and form) or extrinsic (as the agent and final cause).  

But the philosopher, who inquires about the existence of things and their final and efficient cause, does not include them under the quiddity, since they are extrinsic. If we say, then, that a house is something which protects us from cold and heat, the quiddity is signified from the viewpoint of logic, but not from that of the philosopher. Hence, he says that the thing which is being investigated as the cause of the form in the matter is the quiddity, logically speaking. Yet, according to the truth of the matter and from the point of view of natural philosophy, in the case of some things (such as a house and a bed), this cause is ***that for the sake of which a thing exists***, that is, its end.  

**1659**. He draws examples from the sphere of artificial things because it is most evident that these exist for the sake of some goal. For even though natural things also exist for some goal, this was nevertheless denied by some thinkers. Therefore, when someone asks why stones and timbers are a house, one can answer by stating the final cause: to shelter ourselves from cold and heat. But, in certain cases, the thing under investigation, that ***which first moves*** a thing, the agent, is as the cause of the form in the matter. For this also is a cause. For example, if we ask, “why are stones and timbers a house?” one can answer, “because of the art of building.”  

**1660**. Yet there is this difference between the efficient and the final cause: such a cause (the efficient) is investigated as the cause of the process of generation and corruption. But the other cause (the final) is investigated not merely as the cause of the process of generation and corruption, but also of being. The reason for this is that the agent causes the form in the matter by changing the matter over to that form, as takes place in the process of generation and corruption. And inasmuch as the goal moves the agent through his intending it, it is also a cause of generation and corruption. And inasmuch as the thing is directed to its goal by means of its form, it is also a cause of being.  

Hence, when it is said that stones and timbers are a house as a result of the art of building, it is understood that the art of building is the cause of the production of the house. But when it is said that stones and timbers are a house in order to shelter us from cold and heat, it can be understood that the house has been built for this reason, and that it is useful for this reason.  

**1661**. Now, the Philosopher is speaking here of natural substances. Hence his statement here must be understood to apply only to a natural agent, which acts by means of motion. For the divine agent, who communicates being without motion, is the cause not only of becoming but also of being.  

**1662**. ***Now, the object*** (1041a32). Since he had said above that, when one asks why, one always inquires about something as predicated of something else, and this seems in a way to give rise to a problem, therefore, in this place, he raises the problem about this point and solves it. Now, in regard to this, he does three things.  

First, he raises the problem.  

Second (1041b2; [1664]), he solves it, at ***but corrections***.  

Third (1041b9; [1669]), he draws a corollary from his discussion, at ***hence, it is evident***.  

He accordingly first says (1041a32) that ***the object of our inquiry***, that is, what is investigated in any inquiry pertaining to one thing as predicated of something else, ***is most obscure***, or puzzling, ***in cases concerned with things not predicated of others***, that is, where the inquiry is about something not predicated of something else, but about a single thing. For when one inquires, “what is man?” this, I say, is obscure, because a single term is used, but it is ***not said definitely that he is this or that***. In other words, the cause of the difficulty is that, in such cases, one single thing is expressed, such as man, and in that inquiry, the things to which it belongs to be a man as parts, or also the particular suppositum, are not expressed.  

**1663**. But this difficulty does not seem to have anything to do with the point at issue. For the Philosopher spoke above about the question “why is a thing such?” and not “what is it?” Yet this difficulty has to do with the question “what is it?” But it must be said that the questions “what is it?” and “why is it?” bear on the same point, as has been stated [1651]. Hence, the question “what is it?” can be changed into the question “why is it such?” For the question “what is it?” asks about the quiddity by which the thing in question is predicated of any of its own subjects and is proper to its own parts; for Socrates is a man because the answer to the question “what is man?” is pertinent to him. And for this reason, flesh and bones are man, because the whatness of man is contained in these flesh and bones. Therefore, it is the same thing to ask “what is man?” and “why is Socrates a man?” or “why are these flesh and bones a man?” And this is the same as the question which was raised above, “why are stones and timbers a house?” Therefore, he also says here that this causes a difficulty, because, in this investigation, “this” and “that” are not added. For if they were added, it would be evident that the answer to the question about the quiddity of man would be the same [as that] to the other questions of which he spoke above.  

**1664**. ***But corrections*** (1041b2). He now solves the foregoing problem. He says that, in order to dispose of the problem relating to the foregoing question, ***corrections must be sought***, that is, it is necessary to correct the question given, so that, in place of the question “what is man?” we will substitute the question “why is Socrates a man?” or “why are flesh and bones a man?” And if this question is not corrected, the absurd consequence will be that asking something and asking nothing will have something in common. For it was said above that to ask something about a thing in terms of itself is not to make any inquiry at all, but to ask something about something else is to ask about something. Therefore, since the question “why?” (in which we ask something about something else) and the question “what?” (in which we do not seem to ask something about something else) have something in common unless they are corrected in the way mentioned above, it follows that a question asking nothing and a question asking something have something in common.  

**1665**. Or to state it in another way, if this question is not corrected, it follows that those cases in which no question at all is asked and those in which a question is asked have something in common. For when a question is asked about that which is, something is asked, but when a question is asked about that which is not, nothing is asked. Hence, if in asking what a thing is, we need not assume anything and ask anything else of it, this question applies both to being and to non-being. Thus the question “what is it?” would apply in common both to something and to nothing.  

**1666**. But since in the question “what is man?” it is necessary to know the truth that man exists (otherwise there would be no question)—just as when we ask why there is an eclipse, we must know that an eclipse exists—it is evident that one who asks *what* man is asks *why* he is. For in order that one may ask what a thing is, the existence of the thing has to be presupposed, because it is assumed by the question “why?” Thus, when we ask, “what is a house?” it is the same as asking, “why are these materials (stones and timbers) a house?” It is because the parts of a house ***constitute the being of a house***, that is, the quiddity of a house is present in the parts of a house.  

**1667**. For it was said above that, in such cases, the question why sometimes asks about the form, sometimes about the agent, and sometimes about the goal of a thing. And similarly, when we ask what man is, it is the same as asking why Socrates is a man, because the quiddity of man belongs to him. Or it would also be the same as asking, “why is a body, which is disposed organically in this way, a man?” For this is the matter of man, as stones and bricks are the matter of a house.  

**1668**. Hence, in such questions, it is evident that we are asking about ***the cause of the matter***, or why it is made to be of this nature. Now, the thing under investigation, which is the cause of the matter, is ***the species***, namely, the form by which something is. And this ***is the substance***, that is, the very substance in the sense of the quiddity. Thus it follows that his thesis has been proved, that is, that substance is a principle and cause.  

**1669**. ***Hence, it is evident*** (1041b9). He then draws a corollary from his discussions. He says that since, in all questions, one asks about something as predicated of something else—as the cause of the matter, which is the formal cause, or the cause of the form in matter, as the final cause and the agent—it is evident that there is no inquiry about simple substances, which are not composed of matter and form. For, as has been stated, in every inquiry, there must be something which is known and some investigation about something unknown. Now, such substances are either totally known or totally unknown, as is stated in book 9 (1051b23; [1904]). Hence, there is no inquiry about them.  

**1670**. And for this reason, there also cannot be any teaching concerning them, as there is in the speculative sciences. For teaching produces science, and science arises in us by our knowing why a thing is. For the middle term of a demonstrative syllogism, which causes science, is why a thing is so.  

**1671**. But, lest the study of such substances should seem to be foreign to the philosophy of nature, he therefore adds that the method of investigating such things is different. For we come to an understanding of these substances only from sensible substances, of which these simple substances are, in a measure, the cause. Therefore, we make use of sensible substances as known, and by means of them we investigate simple substances, just as the Philosopher investigates below (book 12) the immaterial substances, which cause motion by means of motion. Hence, in our teaching and investigations of them, we use effects as the middle term in our investigations of simple substances whose quiddities we do not know.  

And it is also evident that simple substances are related to sensible ones in the process of teaching as the form and other causes are related to matter. For just as we inquire about the form of sensible substances and about their goal and their efficient causes as the causes of matter, in a similar fashion, we inquire about simple substances as the causes of material substances.  

**1672**. ***Now, what is composed*** (1041b11). Here he shows what kind of cause and principle [simple] substance is when taken as the quiddity of a thing, and in regard to this, he does three things.  

First, he premises a certain distinction necessary for the proof of his thesis.  

Second (1041b19; [1675]), he raises a difficulty, at ***therefore, if something***.  

Third (1041b25; [1678]), he solves it, at ***now it would seem***.  

In regard to the first (1041b11), he distinguishes one kind of composition from several others. For sometimes composition involves many things in such a way that the whole is one thing composed of many, as a house is composed of its parts and a compound is composed of elements. But sometimes a composite results from many things in such a way that the whole composite is not one thing in an unqualified sense, but only in a qualified one, as is clear of a heap or pile of stones when the parts are actual, not being continuous. Hence, it is many in an unqualified sense, and is one only in a qualified sense, inasmuch as many things are grouped together in place.  

**1673**. Now, it is characteristic of the notion of this kind of diversity that the composite sometimes derives its species from some one thing, which is either the form (as in a compound) or combination (as in a house) or arrangement (as in a syllable or in a number). And then the whole composite must be one without qualification. But sometimes the composite derives its species from the very multitude of collected parts, as in a heap of things and a group of people and so forth. In such cases, the whole composite is not a unity in an unqualified sense, but only with qualification.  

**1674**. Hence, the Philosopher says that, since one kind of composite ***is composed of something in such a way that everything***—that is, the whole—***is one***, and not in the way in which a heap of stones is one, but as a syllable is one (without qualification)—in all such cases, the composite must not be identical with its components, as a syllable is not its letters. For this syllable *BA* is not the same as these two letters *B* and *A*, nor is flesh the same as fire and earth.  

He proves this as follows. ***When these are dissociated***, that is, when the things of which the composite is made up are separated from each other, ***this***—the whole—does not remain after its dissolution. For when the elements have been actually separated, flesh does not remain, and when its letters have been separated, the syllable does not remain. ***But the elements***, or the letters, remain after the dissolution of the syllable, and fire and earth remain after the dissolution of flesh. Therefore, the syllable is something over and above its elements, and it is not only its elements (which are vowels and consonants), but there is also something else by which a syllable is a syllable. And in a similar way flesh is not merely fire and earth, or the hot and the cold, by whose power the elements are mixed, but there is also something else by which flesh is flesh.  

**1675**. ***Therefore, if something*** (1041b19). He raises a problem relating to his principal thesis, for it was shown that there is something else in flesh and in a syllable besides their elements. For it seems that everything which is either is an element or is composed of elements. If, then, it is necessary that this additional something which is present in flesh and in a syllable over and above their elements should be either an element or composed of elements, this absurdity results.  

**1676**. For if this is an element, the same argument will apply again both to this and to other elements, because it will have to be numbered with the others. For flesh will be composed both of this thing, which we said was something over and above the elements, and which we now claim to be an element, and of fire and earth. And since it has already been proved that, in every composite which is one, there must be something in addition to its elements, the same question will then apply to this something else, for if it is an element, flesh will again be composed both of the other original element and of the elements, and then of something else. Hence, in this way, there will be an infinite regress. But this is absurd.  

**1677**. Therefore, if this something else, when found, is not an element, but is composed of elements, it is evident that it is not composed of one element only, but of many. For if it were not composed of many, but of only one, it would follow that that element would be the same as the whole. For what is composed of water only is truly water. Hence, if it is composed of many elements, the same argument will again apply to this thing as applies to flesh and a syllable, because it will contain something else besides the elements of which it is composed. And the same question will again apply to this. Thus, once more, there will be an infinite regress.  

**1678**. ***Now it would seem*** (1041b25). Then he solves the problem which he raised, and in regard to this, he does two things.  

First, he solves it with reference to the way in which it first appears.  

Second (1041b28; [1679]), he corrects this solution and gives the true one, at ***and since certain things***.  

He accordingly first says (1041b25) that the thing which is present in composites over and above their elements would seem at first glance not to be something composed of elements, but to be an element and cause of the being of flesh and a syllable, and similarly of other things. Moreover, it would seem that it is the substance of each of them in the sense of their quiddity; for substance in the sense of quiddity is the first cause of being.  

**1679**. ***And since certain things*** (1041b28). He now corrects the above solution in two ways.  

First, insofar as he had said that this something else which is present in composite things over and above their elements is the substance of each, for this is true of things that are substances, but not of things that are not substances, since the form of a syllable is not a substance.  

Second, insofar as he had said that this very thing is an element and a cause of being, for it cannot be called an element, but a principle, because elements pertain to the material cause of a thing.  

**1680**. Therefore, he says that, since some things are not substances (as is especially clear of artificial things), but only those are true substances which are ***according to nature***, with reference to being, ***and are constituted such by nature***, with reference to becoming, it will be made clear that this nature which we are investigating is substance ***in some cases***, that is, in that of natural beings, but not in all. And it will also be made clear that this nature is not an element, but a formal principle; for that is called an element into which something is divided and which is ***intrinsic*** as matter—for example, the elements of the syllable *BA* are *B* and *A*. Hence, since the principle in question is not a material principle, but a formal one, it will not be an element. And thus, it is evident at the same time both what kind of principle substance is and that it is neither an element nor composed of elements. The foregoing problem is solved in this way.
