# AveMaria.S1.19

Second, the blessed Virgin excels the angels in her closeness to God. The angel Gabriel indicated this when he said: ***the Lord is with you***, as if to say: “I reverence you because you art nearer to God than I, because the Lord is with you.” By ***the Lord***, he means the Father with the Son, whom no angel or any other creature have: *the holy which shall be born of you shall be called the Son of God* (Luke 1:35). God the Son was in her womb: *rejoice and praise, O you habitation of Zion; for great is he that is in the midst of you, the holy one of Israel* (Isa 12:6). The Lord is not with the angel in the same manner as with the blessed Virgin; for with her he is as a son, and with the angel he is the Lord. The Lord, the Holy Spirit, is in her as in a temple, so that it is said: *the temple of the Lord, the sanctuary of the Holy Spirit*,See the Antiphon of the Magnificat in the feast of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin Mary (November 21), and in another place of the same Office of the Virgin Mary. because she conceived by the Holy Spirit. *The Holy Spirit shall come upon you* (Luke 1:35). The blessed Virgin is closer to God than is an angel, because with her are the Lord the Father, the Lord the Son, and the Lord the Holy Spirit, in a word, the Holy Trinity. Indeed of her we sing: *noble resting place of the Triune God*.See the sequence of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin: *Salve, Mater Salvatoris*. See also *Missale secundum Ordinem Fratrum Praedicatorum* (Venice, 1553), p. 234. This sequence was composed by Albert the Great, as attested to in: Edmund Martene, Ursini Durand, *Veterum Scriptorum et monumentorum historicorum, dogmaticorum, moralium, amplissima collectio* (Paris: Montalant, 1729), vol. 6, “Brevis Historia Ordinis Praedicatorum,” ch. 6, p. 360; the hymn has also been attributed to Adam of St. Victor. ***The Lord is with you*** are the most praise-laden words that the angel could have uttered; and, hence, he so rightly reverenced the blessed Virgin because she is the mother of the Lord, and therefore she is our Lady. Accordingly she is very well named Mary, which in the Syrian tongue means “lady.”
