# Letter to Brother John on the Manner of Studying

Since you have asked me, my dearest in Christ Brother John, how you should study in order to acquire the treasure of knowledge, I offer you this advice on the matter: that you choose to enter through the streams rather than rush directly into the sea, since one must come to harder things through easier ones. This, therefore, is my warning and your instruction:

I urge you to be slow to speak, and slow in going to the parlor; embrace purity of conscience. Do not cease from prayer. Often love the cell, if you wish to be led into the wine-cellar. Show yourself amiable to all. Ask nothing whatsoever about the deeds of others. Do not show yourself very familiar with anyone, for too much familiarity breeds contempt and supplies an occasion for withdrawing from study. Do not in any way involve yourself in the words and deeds of worldly people. Avoid running about above all things. Do not omit imitating the footsteps of the saints and good men. Look not at who is speaking, but commit to memory whatever good is said. Take care to understand whatever you read and hear. Make yourself certain about doubtful things. And labor to store up in the little cabinet of your mind whatever you can, as one wishing to fill a jar. Do not seek things higher than yourself.

Following such footsteps, you will bring forth flowers and produce useful fruit in the vineyard of the Lord of Hosts as long as you live. If you follow these things, you will be able to reach that which you desire.
