# Article 1 — Whether a second marriage is lawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that a second marriage is unlawful. For we should judge of things according to truth. Now Chrysostom (Hom. 32 in the *Opus Imperfectum*) says that *to take a second husband is in truth fornication*, which is unlawful. Therefore, neither is a second marriage lawful.  

Obj. 2: Further, whatever is not good is unlawful. Now Ambrose (*On Widows*) says that *a* *second marriage is not good*. Therefore, it is unlawful.  

Obj. 3: Further, no one should be debarred from being present at such things as are becoming and lawful. Yet priests are debarred from being present at second marriages, as stated in the text (*Sentences* IV, D. 42). Therefore, they are unlawful.  

Obj. 4: Further, no one incurs a penalty save for sin. Now a person incurs the penalty of irregularity on account of being married twice. Therefore, a second marriage is unlawful.  

On the contrary, We read of Abraham having contracted a second marriage (Gen 25:1).  

Further, The Apostle says: *I will that the younger*, namely, widows, *should marry, bear children* (1 Tim 5:14). Therefore, second marriages are lawful.  

I answer that, The marriage tie lasts only until death (Rom 7:2), wherefore at the death of either spouse the marriage tie ceases: and consequently when one dies the other is not hindered from marrying a second time on account of the previous marriage. Therefore, not only second marriages are lawful, but even third and so on.  

Reply Obj. 1: Chrysostom is speaking in reference to the cause which is wont at times to incite a person to a second marriage, namely, concupiscence, which incites also to fornication.  

Reply Obj. 2: A second marriage is stated not to be good not because it is unlawful, but because it lacks the honor of the signification which is in a first marriage, where *one husband has one wife*, as in the case *of Christ and the Church*.  

Reply Obj. 3: Men who are consecrated to divine things are debarred not only from unlawful things, but even from things which have any appearance of turpitude; and consequently they are debarred from second marriages, which lack the decorum which was in a first marriage.  

Reply Obj. 4: Irregularity is not always incurred on account of a sin, and may be incurred through a defect in a sacrament. Hence the argument is not to the point.
