# Article 3 — Whether the character of holy orders presupposes the baptismal character?

Objection 1: It would seem that the character of holy orders does not presuppose the character of baptism. For the character of holy orders makes a man a dispenser of the sacraments; while the character of baptism makes him a recipient of them. Now active power does not necessarily presuppose passive power, for it can be without it, as in God. Therefore, the character of holy orders does not necessarily presuppose the character of baptism.  

Obj. 2: Further, it may happen that a man is not baptized, and yet think with probability that he has been baptized. If, therefore, such a person present himself for holy orders, he will not receive the character of holy orders, supposing the character of holy orders to presuppose the character of baptism; and consequently whatever he does by way of consecration or absolution will be invalid, and the Church will be deceived therein, which is inadmissible.  

On the contrary, Baptism is the *door of the sacraments*. Therefore, since holy orders is a sacrament, it presupposes baptism.  

I answer that, No one can receive what he has not the power to receive. Now the character of baptism gives a man the power to receive the other sacraments. Therefore, he that has not the baptismal character can receive no other sacrament; and consequently the character of holy orders presupposes the character of baptism.  

Reply Obj. 1: In one who has active power of himself, the active does not presuppose the passive power; but in one who has active power from another, passive power, whereby he is enabled to receive the active power, is prerequisite to active power.  

Reply Obj. 2: Such a man, if he be ordained to the priesthood, is not a priest, and he can neither consecrate nor absolve in the tribunal of penance. Therefore, according to the canons he must be baptized and reordained (*Decretals*). And even though he be raised to the episcopate, those whom he ordains receive not the holy orders. Yet it may piously be believed that as regards the ultimate effects of the sacraments, the High Priest will supply the defect, and that he would not allow this to be so hidden as to endanger the Church.
