# Article 4 — Whether bigamy is removed by baptism?

Objection 1: It would seem that bigamy is removed by baptism. For Jerome says in his commentary on the Epistle to Titus (on Titus 1:6: *the husband of one wife*) that if a man has had several wives before receiving baptism, or one before and another after baptism, he is not a bigamist. Therefore, bigamy is removed by baptism.  

Obj. 2: Further, he who does what is more, does what is less. Now baptism removes all sin, and sin is a greater thing than irregularity. Therefore, it removes irregularity.  

Obj. 3: Further, baptism takes away all punishment resulting from an act. Now such is the irregularity of bigamy. Therefore, etc.  

Obj. 4: Further, a bigamist is irregular because he is deficient in the representation of Christ. Now by baptism we are fully conformed to Christ. Therefore, this irregularity is removed.  

Obj. 5: Further, the sacraments of the new law are more efficacious than the sacraments of the old law. But the sacraments of the old law removed irregularities, according to the Master’s statement (*Sentences* 4). And therefore baptism, being the most efficacious of the sacraments of the new law, removes the irregularity consequent upon bigamy.  

On the contrary, Augustine says: *those understand the question more correctly who maintain that a man who has married a second wife, though he was a catechumen or even a pagan at the time, cannot be ordained, because it is a question of a sacrament, not of a sin* (*On the Good of Marriage* 18).  

Further, According to the same authority, *a woman who has been corrupted while a catechumen or a pagan cannot after baptism be consecrated among God’s virgins* (*On the Good of Marriage* 18). Therefore, in like manner one who was a bigamist before baptism cannot be ordained.  

I answer that, Baptism removes sin, but does not dissolve marriage. Therefore, since irregularity results from marriage, it cannot be removed by baptism, as Augustine says (*On the Good of Marriage* 18).  

Reply Obj. 1: In this case Jerome’s opinion is not to be held: unless perhaps he wished to explain that he means that a dispensation should be more easily granted.  

Reply Obj. 2: It does not follow that what does a greater thing does a lesser, unless it be directed to the latter. This is not so in the case in point, because baptism is not directed to the removal of an irregularity.  

Reply Obj. 3: This must be understood of punishments consequent upon actual sin, which are, or have yet to be, inflicted: for one does not recover virginity by baptism, nor again undivision of the flesh.  

Reply Obj. 4: Baptism conforms a man to Christ as regards the virtue of the mind, but not as to the condition of the body, which is effected by virginity or division of the flesh.  

Reply Obj. 5: Those irregularities were contracted through slight and temporary causes, and consequently they could be removed by those sacraments. Moreover, the latter were ordained for that purpose, whereas baptism is not.
