# Article 5 — Whether a sentence of excommunication can be passed on a university?

Objection 1: It would seem that sentence of excommunication can be passed on a university. For it is possible for a number of people to be united together in wickedness. Now, when a man is obstinate in his wickedness he should be excommunicated. Therefore, a university can be excommunicated.  

Obj. 2: Further, the most grievous effect of an excommunication is privation of the sacraments of the Church. But sometimes a whole country is laid under an interdict. Therefore, a university can be excommunicated.  

On the contrary, A Gloss of Augustine (*Epistle* 250) on Matthew 12 asserts that the sovereign and a body of people cannot be excommunicated.  

I answer that, No man should be excommunicated except for a mortal sin. Now sin consists in an act: and acts do not belong to communities, but, generally speaking, to individuals. Wherefore individual members of a community can be excommunicated, but not the community itself.  

And although sometimes an act belongs to a whole multitude, as when many draw a boat which none of them could draw by himself, yet it is not probable that a community would so wholly consent to evil that there would be no dissentients. Now God, who judges all the earth, does not condemn the just with the wicked (Gen 18:25). Therefore the Church, who should imitate the judgments of God, prudently decided that a community should not be excommunicated, *lest the wheat be uprooted together with the tares and cockle*.  

The reply to the first objection is evident from what has been said.  

Reply Obj. 2: Suspension is not so great a punishment as excommunication, since those who are suspended are not deprived of the prayers of the Church, as the excommunicated are. Wherefore a man can be suspended without having committed a sin himself, just as a whole kingdom is laid under an interdict on account of the king’s crime. Hence there is no comparison between excommunication and suspension.
