# Article 5 — Whether all men will be present at the judgment?

Objection 1: It would seem that men will not all be present at the judgment. For it is written: *you shall sit on twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel* (Matt 19:28). But all men do not belong to those twelve tribes. Therefore, it would seem that men will not all be present at the judgment.  

Obj. 2: Further, the same apparently is to be gathered from Psalm 1:5: *the wicked shall not rise again in judgment*. But many are such. Therefore, they will not be present at the judgment.  

Obj. 3: Further, a man is brought to judgment that his merits may be discussed. But some there are who have acquired no merits, such as children who died before reaching the perfect age. Therefore, they need not be present at the judgment.  

On the contrary, It is written that Christ *was appointed by God to be judge of the living and of the dead* (Acts 10:42). Now this division comprises all men, no matter how the living be distinct from the dead. Therefore, all men will be present at the judgment.  

Further, It is written: *behold he comes with the clouds, and every eye shall see him* (Rev 1:7). Now this would not be so unless all were present at the judgment. Therefore, etc.  

I answer that, The judicial power was bestowed on Christ as man in reward for the humility which he showed forth in his passion. Now in his passion he shed his blood for all in point of sufficiency, although through meeting with an obstacle in some, it had not its effect in all. Therefore, it is fitting that all men should assemble at the judgment to see his exaltation in his human nature, in respect of which *he was appointed by God to be judge of the living and of the dead*.  

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (*The City of God* 20.5), *it does not follow from the saying, “Judging the twelve tribes of Israel,” that the tribe of Levi, which is the thirteenth, is not to be judged, or that they will judge that people alone, and not other nations*. The reason why all other nations are denoted by the twelve tribes is because they were called by Christ to take the place of the twelve tribes.  

Reply Obj. 2: The words, *the wicked shall not rise in judgment*, if referred to all sinners, mean that they will not arise to judge. But if the wicked denote *unbelievers*, the sense is that they will not arise to be judged, because they are *already judged* (John 3:18). All, however, will rise again to assemble at the judgment and witness the glory of the Judge.  

Reply Obj. 3: Even children who have died before reaching the perfect age will be present at the judgment, not to be judged, but to see the Judge’s glory.
