# Lecture 1 — Preaching in Jerusalem

^2:1^ Then, after fourteen years, I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me. [n. 51]  

> ^2:2^ And I went up according to revelation and communicated to them the Gospel which I preach among the gentiles: but separately to them who seemed to be something: lest perhaps I should run or had run in vain. [n. 56]

> ^2:3^ But neither was Titus, who was with me, being a gentile, compelled to be circumcised, [n. 60]

> ^2:4^ But because of false brethren brought in unawares, who came in privately to spy on our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into servitude. [n. 62]

> ^2:5^ To whom we yielded not by subjection: no, not for an hour: that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you.

> **51**. After commending the authority of the Gospel teaching according to itself in the preceding chapter, the Apostle now in this chapter commends it on the part both of the other apostles and of himself.

About this he does two things.  

First, he commends the authority of his teaching because of its approval by the other apostles;  

second, from the example both of himself and of the other apostles, at ***we by nature are Jews: and not of the gentiles*** (Gal 2:15).  

Concerning the first he does two things.  

First, he shows that the other apostles approved his teaching;  

second, that he fearlessly rebuked the other apostles in matters where they opposed his teaching, at ***but when Cephas was come*** (Gal 2:11).  

As to the first he does two things.  

First, he treats of the discussion he had with the apostles;  

second, he narrates the consequences of that discussion, at ***but neither was Titus***.  

Regarding the first he does two things.  

First, he gives the circumstances of that discussion;  

second, what they discussed, at ***and communicated to them the Gospel***.  

With respect to the first he touches upon four things, namely the time, the place, the witnesses, and the motive.  

**52**. He mentions the time when he says, ***then, after fourteen years***.  

Here some might object that if the Apostle was converted in the first year after the passion of Christ, and went to Jerusalem three years later, that makes four years. But he says, ***after fourteen years*** I went once more to Jerusalem, which makes a total of eighteen years, at which time he found Peter in Jerusalem. But this cannot be, because Peter had his See at Antioch seven years, and then at Rome for twenty-five years. So that makes eighteen plus seven, i.e., twenty-five years, before he went to Rome, and twenty-five years more he remained there. Hence Peter would have lived for fifty years after the passion of Christ, which is false, for in the fortieth year after the passion of Christ, Peter was martyred at Rome in the reign of Nero, as is recorded in history.  

I answer that when he says, ***then, after fourteen years***, it is not to be understood that after three years there was another lapse of fourteen years before he went to Jerusalem, but that he went again in the fourteenth year of his conversion. Nor should the seven years that Peter ruled the Church at Antioch be added to those fourteen years, because he began his rule before those years. Furthermore, since Antioch is near Jerusalem, Peter could at times have come to Jerusalem and Paul found him there then. Consequently, what is gathered from history is that after fourteen years Peter went to Rome in the reign of Claudius the Emperor and lived there for twenty-five years, making a total of thirty-nine years, and he died in the fortieth year after the passion of Our Lord.  

Yet he purposely said ***fourteen*** in order to show that he did not need instructions from the apostles, if he went for fourteen years without them.  

**53**. He gives the place when he says, ***Jerusalem***. And he says, ***I went up***, because it is built on a height. He went up to Jerusalem in order to show that he was in accord with the prophecy: *for the law shall come forth from Zion: and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem* (Isa 2:3).  

**54**. He gives the witnesses when he says, ***with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me***. Now Barnabas was a Jew, but Titus a gentile. He went up with them, therefore, in order to have witnesses to his teaching and to show that he leaned neither to the side of the Jews nor the gentiles: *in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall stand* (Deut 19:15).  

**55**. He gives his motive when he says, ***according to a revelation from God***, i.e., because God revealed and commanded him to go up to Jerusalem. From this can be gathered that all the acts and movements of the apostles were according to an instinct of the Holy Spirit: *the clouds spread their light which go round about* (Job 37:11).  

**56**. Then when he says, ***and communicated to them***, he describes the conversation. About this he does three things.  

First, he mentions the subject of their conversation; second, the persons with whom he conferred; third, the reason why he conferred with them.  

The subject about which he conferred was the Gospel; hence he says, ***I communicated to them the Gospel***; the persons with whom he conferred were the senior and more outstanding apostles; hence he says, ***but separately to them who seemed to be something***. But the reason, both useful and necessary, was ***lest I should run or had run in vain***.  

**57**. Regarding the first, he says, ***I went up to Jerusalem* **where ***I communicated to them***, as to friends and equals, ***the Gospel which I preach among the gentiles***, not in order to learn, because I had already been taught by Christ, nor in order to be reassured, because I am so certain, that if an angel were to say the contrary, I would not believe him, as is plain above (Gal 1:8).  

But I conferred for two reasons: namely, to show the unity of my teaching with that of the other apostles: *that you all speak the same thing and that there be no schisms among you* (1 Cor 1:10). Hence he conferred with them as one having the same word as they, and not as an adversary. Also, to avoid false accusation from others. For the Apostle had not lived with Christ or been taught by the apostles, but immediately after his conversion began to preach things odious to the Jews, especially the vocation of the gentiles and that they should not observe the justifications of the law.  

In this way, then, he conferred about the Gospel.  

**58**. But he indicates the ones with whom he did this, when he adds, ***but separately to them who seemed to be something***. As though to say: not with all, but with those who were of some authority and importance among them, namely, with Peter, James and John and the other great ones: *treat with the wise and prudent* (Sir 9:21). ***But separately***, not to talk or treat with them about ignoble or false things, as heretics do, but because he was aware of the presence there of Jews who brought false charges against him for his teachings about the law. Hence, in order that the truth might prevail over false charges, he spoke separately with those who would not bring false charges against him: *treat your cause with your friend, and discover not the secret to a stranger* (Prov 25:9); *before a stranger do no matter of counsel: for you do not know what he will bring forth* (Sir 8:21).  

Thus the subject of the discussion as well as the persons are made known.  

**59**. Then follows the cause, which was ***lest perhaps I should run or had run in vain***, i.e., lest I be thought to have preached to no purpose. He calls his preaching a ‘running’ on account of the rapidity of his teaching, for in a short time he preached the Gospel from Jerusalem to Illyricum and even as far as Spain. Hence the word can be said of him: *his word runs swiftly* (Ps 147:15); *pray, brethren, that the word of God may run and may be glorified, even as among you* (2 Thess 3:1).  

But did he really wonder whether he was running in vain? I answer that he did not wonder for himself, but for those to whom he had preached, because if his teaching was not firmly held by them, he would have run in vain as far as they were concerned. So he wanted to confer with them, in order that when his hearers heard that his teaching was in agreement with that of the other apostles and approved by them, they would hold to it more firmly, and then he would not be running in vain with respect to them: *Therefore I so run, not as at an uncertainty* (1 Cor 9:26).  

**60**. Then when he says, ***but neither Titus who was with me***, he shows what resulted from the discussion held with the apostles. And he mentions three results:  

that he did not depart from his opinion;  

that nothing was added to his teaching, at ***but of them who seemed*** (Gal 2:6).  

Third, that his teaching was approved, at ***but contrariwise, when they had seen*** (Gal 2:7).  

Concerning the first he does two things.  

First, he shows with respect to one definite point that he did not depart from his teaching;  

second, that on no other point did he depart from it, at ***but because of false brethren***.  

**61**. He says, therefore: I say that the result of my discussion with them about the teaching of the Gospel was that my teaching and opinion remained unaltered concerning the non-observance of legalism, i.e., the gentiles would not be compelled to observe the rites of the law so that ***neither was Titus who with me, being a gentile, was compelled to be circumcised***, but was admitted uncircumcised into their fellowship by the apostles. This discussion occasioned the decree handed down by the apostles on not observing the rites of the law, as is had in Acts (Acts 15:28).  

The reason why these rites were not to be observed after the passion of Christ is assigned in the following way by Chrysostom: *for it is evident that the instrument drawn up for any promise or pact binds only until the pact and promise are fulfilled; but when fulfilled, the instrument no longer binds on that point*. Now circumcision is an instrument of the promise and pact between God and believing men. Hence it was that Abraham underwent circumcision as a sign of the promise, as is said in Genesis (Gen 11:26). And because the promise was fulfilled and the pact completed by the passion of Christ, neither the pact holds after the passion nor is circumcision of any value.  

Thus, therefore, his refusal to permit Titus to be circumcised makes it plain that he did not depart from his teaching.  

**62**. Then when he says, ***but because of false brethren brought in unawares***, he shows that he did not change on any other point.  

This passage is obscure and variant readings are found. It should be read thus: you say that you did not permit Titus to be circumcised; but why? In another case did you not permit Timothy, as is read in Acts (Acts 16:3)?  

To this the Apostle can respond: when Timothy was circumcised, it was an indifferent matter whether circumcision was observed or not; but later on, when it came to Titus, circumcision became a matter of paramount importance and I said that it is not to be observed. Hence, if I had allowed him to be circumcised, whereas I had already settled the question definitively myself, I would have been acting to the contrary. Furthermore, it was not lawful to raise this question again or to make difficulties about a matter now settled.  

He says therefore: I say that I did not permit him to be circumcised by them, ***to whom we yielded not by subjection, no, not for an hour***, i.e., that the gentiles be subject to the law; and this ***because of false brethren brought in unawares*** by the devil or by the Pharisees: ***false brethren***, because they pretended to be friends: *in perils from false brethren* (2 Cor 11:26).  

***Who***, namely the false brethren, ***came in*** to the place where the apostles were gathered, ***in order to spy on our liberty*** from sin and the law: *where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty* (2 Cor 3:17); *you have not received the spirit of bondage again in fear; but you have received the Spirit of the adoption of sons* (Rom 8:15); ***that he might redeem them who were under the law*** (Gal 4:5).  

***Which*** liberty ***we have in Christ Jesus***, i.e., through faith in Christ: ***you are not children of the bondwoman but of the free*** (Gal 4:31). And to this end were they brought in, ***that they might bring us into servitude*** of the law and the observances of the flesh, as before the passion of Christ. But this is not permissible, *for other foundation no man can lay, but that which is laid; which is Christ Jesus* (1 Cor 3:11).  

And this, ***that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you***. As if to say: we did not yield to them an iota, lest we give an occasion to those who said that you cannot be saved without circumcision, which is contrary to the truth of the Gospel I have preached to you.  

**63**. Ambrose, however, reads it another way. For according to the foregoing the reason he did not yield for the moment was on account of those brought in. From this it follows that if they had not been brought in, he would have yielded in the matter of observing legalism. Therefore it was not on that account, because on that account he would not have yielded to them, but on account of the truth itself.  

Therefore, says Ambrose, the text is faulty and the words, ***no not even***, are superfluous. Hence he would have it that those words should not be there. And then the sense is: I did not permit Titus to be circumcised, but Timothy I did, ***because of false brethren brought in unawares***, i.e., to the place where I was with Timothy and the others ***who came in to spy on our liberty***. But when they failed in this, they tried to incite the people to rise up against us. ***To whom***, i.e., to the false brethren, therefore ***we yielded in the hour of subjection*** in the matter of circumcision by circumcising Timothy, in order that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you, i.e., the Gospel which teaches that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision profits anything, but the faith.  

But the special reason why Timothy was circumcised and Titus not, was that Timothy was born of a gentile father and Jewish mother, whereas Titus’s parents were both gentiles. And the opinion of the Apostle was that those born of a Jewish parent on either side should be circumcised, but those born entirely of gentile parents should on no account be circumcised.
