# Lecture 3 — Peter’s fear of the Jews

^2:11^ But when Cephas had come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed. [n. 76]  

> ^2:12^ For before some came from James, he ate with the gentiles: but when they had come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them who were of the circumcision. [n. 78]

> ^2:13^ And to his dissimulation the rest of the Jews consented: so that Barnabas also was led by them into that dissimulation. [n. 81]

> ^2:14^ But when I saw that they did not walk uprightly unto the truth of the Gospel, I said to Cephas before them all: if you, being a Jew, live after the manner of the gentiles and not as the Jews do, how do you compel the gentiles to live as the Jews do? [n. 82]

> **76**. The Apostle showed above that he received nothing useful from the discussion held with the apostles; now he shows that he benefitted them:

first, he shows how he helped Peter by correcting him;  

second, he tells what he said, at ***for before some came***.  

**77**. He says, therefore: indeed, they advantaged me nothing; rather I conferred something upon them, and especially upon Peter, because ***when Cephas had come to Antioch***, where there was a church of the gentiles, ***I withstood him to the face***, i.e., openly: *do not* *reverence your neighbor in his fall and do not refrain to speak in the time of salvation* (Sir 4:27). Or: ***to the face***, i.e., not in secret as though detracting and fearing him, but publicly and as his equal: *you shall not hate your brother in your heart: but reprove him openly* (Lev 19:17). This he did, ***because he was to be blamed***.  

But it might be objected: this took place after they received the grace of the Holy Spirit; but after the grace of the Holy Spirit the apostles did not sin in any way.  

I answer that after the grace of the Holy Spirit the apostles did not sin mortally, and this gift they had through the divine power that had strengthened them: *I have established the pillars thereof* (Ps 74:4). Yet they sinned venially because of human frailty: *if we say that we have no sin*, i.e., venial, *we deceive ourselves* (1 John 1:8).  

Concerning what is said in a certain Gloss, namely, that *I withstood him* as an adversary, the answer is that the Apostle opposed Peter in the exercise of authority, not in his authority of ruling.  

Therefore from the foregoing we have an example: to prelates, indeed, an example of humility, that they not disdain corrections from those who are lower and subject to them; to subjects, an example of zeal and freedom, that they fear not to correct their prelates, particularly if their crime is public and verges upon danger to the multitude.  

**78**. Then when he says, ***for before some came***, he manifests what he has said.  

First, that he said he was to be blamed;  

second, that he rebuked Peter, at ***but when I saw***.  

As to the first he does three things.  

First, he shows what Peter’s opinion was;  

second, what he did, at ***but when Cephas had come***;  

third, what resulted from it, at ***and to his dissimulation***.  

**79**. He says therefore, as to the first point, that Peter felt that legalism ought not be observed. This he showed by the fact that ***before some came***, namely, Jews zealous for the law, ***from James***, bishop of the church at Jerusalem, ***he ate***, namely, Peter did, ***with the gentiles***, i.e., without compunction he ate the food of gentiles. He did this through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit who had said to him: *that which God has cleansed, do not call common* (Acts 10:15), and as he himself in the following chapter said in answer to the Jews who rose up against him, because he had eaten with the uncircumcised.  

**80**. What Peter did Paul now shows, saying that when he was with the Jews, ***he withdrew*** from the company of the faithful who had been converted from the gentiles and adhered to the Jews alone and mingled among them.  

Therefore he says, ***but when they had come***, namely, from Judea, Peter ***withdrew*** from the converted gentiles ***and separated himself from them***. This he did because he was ***fearing them who were of the circumcision***, i.e., the Jews, not with a human or worldly fear but a fear inspired by charity, namely, lest they be scandalized, as is said in a Gloss. Hence he became to the Jews as a Jew, pretending that he felt the same as they did in their weakness. Yet he feared unreasonably, because the truth must never be set aside through fear of scandal.  

**81**. What resulted from this dissimulation he mentions when he says that ***to his dissimulation***, i.e., Peter’s, ***the rest of the Jews consented*** who were at Antioch, discriminating between food and separating themselves from the gentiles, although prior to this act of dissimulation they would not have done this.  

And not only did they consent to Peter, but such was the effect of that dissimulation upon the hearts of the faithful ***that Barnabas also***, who along with me was a teacher of the gentiles and had done and taught the contrary, ***was led by them into that dissimulation*** and withdrew from them, namely, from the gentiles. And this on account of what is said: *what manner of man the ruler of a city is, such also are they that dwell therein*, and, *as the judge of the people is himself, so also are his ministers* (Sir 10:2).  

**82**. Then when he says, ***but, when I saw***, he explains what he had said concerning the rebuke with which he rebuked Peter.  

As to this he does three things.  

First, he gives the reason for the rebuke;  

second, the manner of rebuking;  

third, the words of the rebuke.  

**83**. The occasion of the rebuke was not slight, but just and useful, namely, the danger to the Gospel teaching. Hence he says: thus was Peter reprehensible, but I alone, ***when I saw that they***, who were doing these things, ***did not*** ***walk uprightly unto the truth of the Gospel***, because its truth was being undone, if the gentiles were compelled to observe the legal justifications, as will be plain below.  

That, they were not walking uprightly is so, because in cases where danger is imminent, the truth must be preached openly and the opposite never condoned through fear of scandalizing others: *that which I tell you in the dark, speak in the light* (Matt 10:27); *the way of the just is right: the path of the just is right to walk in* (Isa 26:7).  

**84**. The manner of the rebuke was fitting, i.e., public and plain. Hence he says, ***I said to Cephas***, i.e., to Peter, ***before them all***, because that dissimulation posed a danger to all: *them that sin, reprove before all* (1 Tim 5:20). This is to be understood of public sins and not of private ones, in which the procedures of fraternal charity ought to be observed.  

**85**. The words the Apostle spoke to Peter when he rebuked him, he adds, saying, ***if you, being a Jew***, by nature and race, ***live after the manner of the gentiles and not as the Jews do***, i.e., if you observe the customs of gentiles and not of Jews, since you know and feel that discriminating among foods is of no importance, ***how do you compel the gentiles***, not indeed by command, but by example of your behavior, ***to live as the Jews do?***  

He says, ***compel***, because as Pope Leo says, *example has more force than words*. Hence Paul rebukes Peter precisely because he had been instructed by God that although he had previously lived as the Jews do, he should no longer discriminate among foods: *that which God has cleansed, do not call common* (Acts 10:15). But now Peter was dissembling the opposite.  

**86**. It should be noted that these words occasioned no small controversy between Jerome and Augustine and, as their writings clearly show, they are seen to disagree on four points.  

First, as to the time of the legal justifications, namely, when they should have been observed. For Jerome distinguishes two periods, one before the passion of Christ and one after. Jerome’s opinion is that the legal justifications were living before the passion of Christ, i.e., had validity, inasmuch as original sin was removed through circumcision, and God was pleased with sacrifices and victims. But after the passion they were, according to him, not only not living i.e., dead, but what is more, they were deadly, so that whoever observed them after the passion of Christ sinned mortally.  

Augustine, on the other hand, distinguishes three periods. One period was before the passion of Christ and, in agreement with Jerome, he says that during that period the legal justifications were living. Another was the period immediately following the passion of Christ, before grace was promulgated (as the time of the apostles in the beginning); during this period, says Augustine, the legal justifications were dead but not yet deadly to the converted Jews, so long as the ones observing them placed no hope in them. Hence the Jews observed them during that period without sinning. But had they placed their trust in them when observing them after their conversion, they would have sinned mortally; because if they placed their trust in them so as to believe that they were necessary for salvation, then, as far as they were concerned, they would have been voiding the grace of Christ. Finally, he posits a third period, after the truth and grace of Christ had been proclaimed. It was during that period, he says, that they were both dead and deadly to all who observed them.  

The reasoning that underlies these statements is that if the Jews had been forbidden the legal observances right after their conversion, it might have seemed that they had previously been on an equal footing with idolaters, who were immediately forbidden to worship idols, and that just as idolatry had never been good, so too the legal observances. Therefore, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, the legal observances were condoned for a short time for the reason given, namely, to show that the legal observances had been good in the past. Hence, says Augustine, the fact that the legal justifications were not forbidden right after the passion of Christ showed that the mother, the synagogue, was destined to be brought in honor to the grave. But whoever did not observe them in that manner would not be honoring the mother, the synagogue, but disturbing her grave.  

**87**. Second, the aforesaid Jerome and Augustine disagree on the observance of the legal justifications with respect to the apostles.  

For Jerome says that the apostles never really observed them but pretended to do so, in order to avoid scandalizing the believers who had been of the circumcision. He says that even Paul made this pretense when he fulfilled a vow in the Temple at Jerusalem (Acts 21:26), and when he circumcised Timothy (Acts 16:3), and when on advice from James he observed some of the justifications (Acts 15:20). But in so doing the apostles were not misleading the faithful, because they did not act with the intention of observing the justifications but for other reasons; for example, they rested on the sabbath, not because it was a legal observance, but for the sake of rest. Likewise, they abstained from food legally unclean, not for the sake of observing the legal justifications but for other reasons; for example, on account of an abhorrence or something of that nature.  

But Augustine says that the apostles observed the legal justifications and intended to do so, but without putting their trust in them as though they were necessary for salvation. Furthermore, this was lawful for them to do, because they had been Jews. Nevertheless, they observed them before grace was proclaimed. Hence just as certain other Jews could safely observe them at that time without putting any trust in them, so too could the apostles.  

**88**. Third, they disagree on the sin of Peter. For Jerome says that in the dissimulation previously mentioned, Peter did not sin, because he did this from charity and, as has been said, not from mundane fear.  

Augustine, on the other hand, says, that he did sin, although venially, on account of the lack of discretion he had by adhering overmuch to one side, namely, to the Jews, in order to avoid scandalizing them. But the stronger of Augustine’s arguments against Jerome is that Jerome adduces on his own behalf seven doctors, four of whom, namely, Laudicens, Alexander, Origen, and Didymus, Augustine rejects as known heretics. To the other three he opposes three of his own, who held with him and his opinion, namely, Ambrose, Cyprian, and Paul himself, who plainly teaches that Peter was deserving of rebuke. Therefore, if it is unlawful to say that anything false is contained in Sacred Scripture, it will not be lawful to say that Peter was not deserving of rebuke.  

For this reason the opinion and statement of Augustine is the truer, because it is more in accord with the words of the Apostle.  

**89**. Fourth, they disagree on Paul’s rebuke. For Jerome says that Paul did not really rebuke Peter but pretended to do so, just as Peter pretended to observe the legal justifications, i.e., just as Peter in his unwillingness to scandalize the Jews pretended to observe the justifications, so Paul, in order not to scandalize the gentiles, feigned displeasure at Peter’s action and pretended to rebuke him. This was done, as it were, by mutual consent, so that each might exercise his care over the believers subject to them.  

Augustine, however, just as he says that Peter really did observe the justifications, says that Paul truly rebuked him without pretense. Furthermore, Peter really sinned by observing them, because his action was a source of scandal to the gentiles from whom he separated himself. But Paul did not sin in rebuking him, because no scandal followed from his rebuke.
