# Lecture 2 — Apostle to the gentiles

^2:6^ But of them who seemed to be something, (what they were at one time is nothing to me: God does not accept the person of man): for to me they that seemed to be something added nothing. [n. 64]  

> ^2:7^ But contrariwise, when they had seen that to me was committed the Gospel of the uncircumcision, as to Peter was that of the circumcision. [n. 70]

> ^2:8^ (For he who wrought in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision wrought in me also among the gentiles.) [n. 72]

> ^2:9^ And when they had known the grace that was given to me, James and Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship: that we should go unto the gentiles, and they unto the circumcision: [n. 73]

> ^2:10^ Only that we should be mindful of the poor: which same thing also I was careful to do. [n. 75]

> **64**. Having shown that the Apostle did not depart from his opinion on any point in the conference mentioned above, he now shows that nothing was added to his teaching by the other apostles.

About this he does two things.  

First, he describes the status of the apostles who were unable to add anything;  

second, he proves his proposition, at ***for to me***.  

Their status he describes from three standpoints.  

**65**. First from the authority they held in the Church, for it was great. Regarding it he says, ***but of them***.  

The text is deficient and should be amended to read, ***but of them***, namely, Peter and John. As if to say: although I would have yielded to them at the time, yet I received from them no new power or teaching. And if I received nothing from them, much less so from others.  

But it is to be noted that if his statement, ***who seemed to be something***, is understood with reference to the grace of God that was in them, it is true that in this respect they were great, because *whom he justified, them he also glorified* (Rom 8:30). However, if it is understood that they were something according to themselves, then it is false, because in that respect they were nothing. For if they seemed to be something according to themselves, they would always have been great, because whatever belongs to a thing according to itself is always present. Hence, since they were not always great, it was not according to themselves that they were seen to be something.  

**66**. Second, he describes their status on the side of what they were before their conversion, i.e., the status they had in the synagogue. This status, he hints gently, was mean and lowly. Hence he says, ***what they were at one time***, for they had been coarse, poor, ignorant and unlettered: *there are not many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble* (1 Cor 1:26). ***But what they were is nothing to me***, i.e., it is not my concern to mention.  

Perhaps his reason for introducing this was that by considering the status they had in the synagogue, which was nothing, and the status of Paul, which was great, they might see that Paul’s opinion on legalism should be preferred to theirs, particularly since Paul has an equal status with them in the Church; so that Paul had a higher rank in the synagogue before their conversion, but after the conversion, he had a rank equal to theirs. Hence when matters concerning the synagogue were discussed, the opinion of Paul deserved to prevail over the others, but when it came to the Gospel, his opinion was as good as theirs. And just as the others were not made great through things pertaining to the law but through Christ, so too in the faith the Apostle was great through Christ and not through things pertaining to the law.  

**67**. Third, he describes their condition by reason of their election by God. Regarding this he says, ***God does not accept the person***. As if to say: they are great because God made them great, not by regarding their merits or demerits, but by regarding what he intended to accomplish. Hence he says: ***God does not accept the person of man***, i.e., he does not consider whether the person is great or little: *for he made the little and the great* (Wis 6:8). Furthermore, without regard to person, he calls everyone to salvation, no longer charging them with their sins for they have passed away: *the old things are passed away* (2 Cor 5:17); *nor will I be mindful of their name* (Ps 16:4). Therefore Peter says: *in very deed I perceive that God is not a respecter of persons* (Acts 10:34).  

**68**. On this point it should be noted that accepting of persons in any transaction is, properly speaking, to take as a deciding factor in that transaction some aspect of the person that has nothing to do with the matter; for example, when I give a benefice to a person just because he is a noble or is handsome. For nobility or beauty have nothing to do with the question of getting a benefice. But if some aspect of the person does have something to do with the matter, then if I consider that aspect in settling the matter, I do not accept the person; for example, if I give a benefice to a person because he is good and will serve the Church well, or because he is well-educated and honorable, I am not an acceptor of persons. Therefore to accept the person is nothing other than to consider some aspect of the person that has no relation to the business.  

Hence, since God in his works and benefits regards nothing that pre-exists on the side of the creature, for that which pertains to the creature is an effect of his election, but takes as his measure merely what pleases his will, according to which he effects all things, and not the condition of their person, as is said in Ephesians (Eph 1:11), it is evident that he does not regard the person of man.  

**69**. Then, having described their condition, he proves his proposition, namely, that they were unable to add anything to him. Hence he says, ***for to me they that seemed to be something added nothing***. As if to say: although they had great authority, they added nothing to my teaching or to my power, because, as was said above, I neither received the Gospel from man nor learned it by man.  

However, a certain Gloss has a different reading, namely, ***what they were at one time is nothing to me***. As if to say: it is not my concern to recount their status before their conversion, i.e., what they were, because this too makes no difference, since I myself had even been a persecutor of that Church; yet God by the pleasure of his will chose and glorified me—and this because the Lord does not regard the person of man.  

**70**. Then when he says, ***but contrariwise, when they had seen***, he shows how his opinion was approved by the apostles.  

About this he does three things.  

First, he gives the reason for this approbation;  

second, he mentions the approbation, at ***James and Cephas***;  

third, he adds a condition that was placed on the approbation, at ***only that we should be mindful***.  

He cites the two causes of the approbation (which moved the apostles to approve the opinion of the Apostle) namely, the office of teaching enjoined by Christ on the Apostle, and the effect of this appointment, at ***and when they had known***.  

As to the first, he does two things: first, he mentions the office to which he was appointed which moved them to approve him;  

second, the manifestation of this office, at ***for he who wrought***.  

**71**. He says therefore: I say that those ***who seemed to be something, added nothing to me***; but rather, contrary to the opinion of the adversaries who came up to Jerusalem to oppose me in this matter, it was I that the apostles approved, and this ***when they had seen that to me was committed the Gospel***, i.e., the office of the preaching, ***of the uncircumcision***, i.e., the injunction to preach to the uncircumcised, namely, the gentiles: *for all the nations are uncircumcised in the flesh, but all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart* (Jer 9:26). Just as to Peter was entrusted the authority to preach to the Jews alone, so to Paul to the gentiles; but later, Peter, too, preached to the gentiles and Paul to the Jews.  

**72**. But because someone might say: what evidence have you that the commission to preach the Gospel to the gentiles was given you, he interjects that it was through certain works of Christ. For just as it is evident that Peter received the Gospel from Christ because of the marvels Christ wrought through him, so it is evident that I received it because of the miracles Christ worked and does work in me.  

Therefore he says, ***he who wrought in Peter to the apostleship***, i.e., made Peter an apostle in Judea, namely Christ, also made me an apostle among the gentiles. And this is the reason which moves them.  

**73**. But because one’s appointment and authority to preach are not enough, unless he carries it out through good understanding and discrete eloquence and commends it by a good life, he adds how he used his authority or the effect of his office, saying, ***and, when they had known the grace of God***. This is a dependent clause, i.e., when they saw that my preaching enjoyed favor and was fruitful, then ***James and Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship***.  

**74**. In this passage is mentioned the approval or fellowship entered into by them and Paul. First, the persons are mentioned with whom the fellowship was formed, namely, ***James and Cephas***, i.e., Peter, ***and John***. James is mentioned first, as being the bishop of Jerusalem where these events took place. The John mentioned was John the Evangelist who did not leave Judea until the time of Vespasian.  

***Who seem to be pillars***. This is a metaphor standing for the support of the entire Church. For just as a whole edifice is supported by the pillars, so the whole Church of the Jews was supported and governed by these men. Of those pillars it is said: *I have established the pillars thereof* (Ps 74:4), i.e., the apostles of the Church; *his legs as pillars of marble, that are set upon bases of gold* (Song 5:15).  

They, on the one side, ***gave the right hands of fellowship***, i.e., consented to the fellowship, ***to me and Barnabas***, the persons on the other side. By giving them their right hands they signified that they accepted them into their hands as a sign of union and unity of opinion.  

Second, the intent or condition of the fellowship is shown when it is said, ***that we should go unto the gentiles, and the unto the circumcision***, i.e., to preach. As if to say: a bond and union was made among us to the effect that just as the faithful obey Peter among the circumcision, i.e., in the Church of the Jewish believers, so all the gentiles converted to Christ should obey Paul and Barnabas.  

**75**. But they added the condition that we should be mindful of the poor of Christ, i.e., of those who had sold all their goods and laid the price at the feet of the apostles and became poor for the sake of Christ. ***Which same thing***, indeed, ***also I was careful to do***, being no less moved than those commanding me, as is plain in Rom 15, 1 Cor 6, and 2 Cor 8, 9.  

Now the reason why the custom prevailed in the early Church for those in the Church of the circumcision to sell their goods and not those in the Church of the gentiles was that the believing Jews were congregated in Jerusalem and in Judea, which was soon to be destroyed by the Romans, as later events proved. Hence the Lord willed that no possessions were to be kept in a place not destined to endure. But the Church of the gentiles was destined to grow strong and increase, and therefore, by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, it came about that the possessions in it were not to be sold.
