# Lecture 8 — The law was a pedagogue

^3:21^ Was the law then against the promises of God: God forbid! For if there had been a law given which could give life, verily justice should have been by the law. [n. 170]  

> ^3:22^ But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise, by the faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to those who believe. [n. 173]

> ^3:23^ But before the faith came, we were kept shut up under the law, unto that faith which was to be revealed. [n. 175]

> ^3:24^ Wherefore the law was our pedagogue in Christ: that we might be justified by faith. [n. 177]

> ^3:25^ But after the faith has come, we are no longer under a pedagogue. [n. 179]

> **170**. Here, the Apostle raises the other question, namely, whether the law is injurious to grace. First, he raises the question, saying, ***was the law then against the promises of God?*** As if to say: if the law was set because of transgressions, does the law go counter to the promises of God, namely, so that what God promised he would do through the promised seed, he would do through another? ***God forbid!*** As if to say: no. For earlier he had said: ***the law does not disannul, to make the promise of no effect*** (Gal 3:17); *the law, indeed is holy and the commandment holy* (Rom 7:12).

**171**. Second, when he says, ***for if there had been a law given***, he answers the question.  

First, he shows that the law is not contrary to the promises of God;  

second, that the law is in keeping with the promises, at ***but the Scripture has concluded***.  

**172**. He says, therefore, that although the law was set because of transgressions, nevertheless, it is not contrary to the promise of God in being unable to remove those transgressions. For if it were to remove them, then it would obviously be against the promises of God, because justice would be obtained by means other than God promised, since it would be through the law and not through faith; whereas it is said: *the just shall live in his faith* (Hab 2:4); *the justice of God is by faith of Jesus Christ* (Rom 3:22).  

Hence he says that ***if there had been a law given which could give life***, i.e., of such power as to confer grace and eternal happiness, then ***verily*** and not seemingly, ***justice should have been by the law***, if the law were to effect what faith is said to effect. Thus faith would serve no end. But the law does not give life, because *the letter* of the law *kills* (2 Cor 3:6); *for the law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has delivered me from the law of sin and of death* (Rom 8:2).  

**173**. Then when he says, ***but the Scripture has concluded all under sin***, he shows that the law is not only not opposed to grace but serves it.  

First, he shows that the law serves God’s promises;  

second, how this service was made manifest in the case of the Jews, at ***but before the faith came***;  

third, how the gentiles even without the law obtained the promises of God, at ***for you are all the children of God*** (Gal 3:26).  

**174**. With respect to the first it should be noted that in general the law serves the promises of God in two ways. First, because it exposes sin: *for by the law is the knowledge of sin* (Rom 3:20). Second, because it reveals human infirmity, in the sense that man cannot avoid sin without grace which was not given by the law. And just as these two things, namely, the knowledge of a disease and the infirmity of the patient are a great inducement to seek medical treatment, so the knowledge of sin and of one’s impotency lead us to seek Christ. Thus, therefore, is the law the servant of grace, inasmuch as it affords a knowledge of sin and actual experience of one’s impotency.  

Hence he says, ***the Scripture***, i.e., the written law, ***has concluded***, i.e., held the Jews enclosed, ***under sin***, i.e., showed them the sins they committed: *for I had not known concupiscence, if the law did not say: you shall not covet* (Rom 7:7). Again, ***has concluded***, because with the coming of the law they took occasion to sin: *for God has concluded all in unbelief, that he may have mercy on all* (Rom 11:32). And all this in order that they would search for grace. Hence he says,** *that the promise***, i.e., the promised grace, ***might be given*** not only to the Jews, but to all ***those who believe***, because that grace was able to free from sin; and this grace is ***by the faith of Jesus Christ***.  

**175**. Then when he says, ***but, before the faith came, we were kept under the law shut up***, he gives experimental evidence of this service, as manifested in the case of the Jews.  

First, he states how the Jews were benefited;  

second, he concludes a corollary, at ***wherefore the law was our pedagogue***.  

**176**. He says therefore: if Scripture, i.e., the written law, kept all things shut up under sin, what benefits did the Jews derive from the law before faith came by grace? He answers and says: ***we*** Jews, before the coming of faith, ***were kept shut up under the law***, inasmuch as it made us avoid idolatry and many other evils; ***we were kept shut up***, I say, not as free men, but as servants under fear; and this ***under the law***, i.e., under the burden and domination of the law: *the law has dominion over a man as long as it lives* (Rom 7:1). And ***we were kept shut up***, i.e., protected, in order that we not be cut off from life, but be made ready ***unto that faith which was to be revealed***: *my salvation is near to come and my justice to be revealed* (Isa 56:1).  

And he says, ***to be revealed***, because, since faith surpasses all human ingenuity, it cannot be acquired by one’s own skill, but by revelation and by the gift of God: *the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh together shall see that the mouth of the Lord has spoken* (Isa 40:5). Or, ***unto that faith***, which was to be revealed in the time of grace, but which in olden times was hidden under many signs. Hence in the time of Christ the veil of the Temple was rent (Matt 27:51).  

**177**. Then when he says, ***the law was our pedagogue in Christ***, he draws a corollary:  

first, he manifests the law’s functions;  

second, when its function ceased, at ***but after the faith is come***.  

**178**. The function of the law was that of a pedagogue; hence he says, ***the law was our pedagogue in Christ***.  

For as long as the heir cannot obtain the benefits of his inheritance, either because he is too young or because of some other shortcoming, he is sustained, and guarded by a tutor called a pedagogue, from *paedos*, which means ‘boy,’ and *goge*, which means ‘a guiding.’ For under the law the just were restrained from evil, as helpless boys are, through fear of punishment; and they were led to progress in goodness by the love and promise of temporal goods. Further, the Jews were promised that through a seed that was to come the blessing of an inheritance would be obtained, but the time for obtaining that inheritance had not yet come. Consequently, it was necessary that until the seed should come, they be kept safe and not do unlawful things. And this was effected by the law.  

And therefore he says, ***wherefore the law was our pedagogue***. As if to say: by being kept shut up under the law, ***the law was our pedagogue***, i.e., it guided and preserved us, ***in Christ***, i.e., in the way of Christ. And this was done in order ***that we might be justified by the faith*** of Christ: *Israel was a child and I loved him* (Hos 11:1); *you have chastised me and I was instructed* (Jer 31:18); *for we account a man to be justified by faith without the works of the law* (Rom 3:28).  

**179**. And although the law was our pedagogue, it did not bring us the full inheritance, because it is said: *the law brought no one to perfection* (Heb 7:19). But the law’s function ended after faith came. Hence he says, ***but, after the faith has come***, namely, of Christ, ***we are no longer under a pedagogue***, i.e., under constraint, which is not necessary for those who are free: *when I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child, but when I became a man I put away the things of a child* (1 Cor 13:11); *if then any be in Christ a new creature, the old things are passed away* (2 Cor 5:17).
