# Lecture 1 — Reproach of the Galatians

^3:1^ O senseless Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been set forth, crucified among you? [n. 113]  

> **113**. Above, the Apostle reproved the Galatians for their vanity and fickleness on the authority of the Gospel teaching by showing that his doctrine was approved by the other apostles. Now through reason and authority he proves the same thing, namely, that the works of the law must not be observed. This he does in two ways.

First, from the insufficiency of the law;  

second, from the dignity of those who have been converted to Christ, at ***as long as the heir*** (Gal 4:1).  

Concerning the first he does two things.  

First, he utters the rebuke;  

second, he begins his proof, at ***this only would I learn*** (Gal 3:2).  

As to the first, he does two things:  

first, he rebukes them by showing that they are foolish;  

second, he gives the reason for his rebuke, at ***before whose eyes***.  

**114**. First, therefore, he chides them for their folly, calling them senseless. Hence he says, ***O senseless Galatians***. Now ‘senseless’ is properly said of one who lacks sense. But the spiritual sense is knowledge of the truth. Hence anyone who lacks the truth is appropriately called senseless: *are you also yet without understanding?* (Matt 15:16); *we fools esteemed their life madness* (Wis 5:4).  

But against this, it is said: *whoever shall say to his brother, ‘you fool’, shall be in danger of hell-fire* (Matt 5:22). Now a fool is the same as one who is senseless. Therefore, the Apostle was in danger of hell-fire.  

But it must be said, as Augustine suggests, that this applies if it is said without reason and with the intention to disparage. But the Apostle said it with reason and with an intention to correct. Hence a Gloss says: *he says this in sorrow*.  

**115**. Second, when he says, ***who has bewitched you***, he shows how they had become senseless.  

Here it is to be noted, first of all, that someone becomes senseless in a number of ways: either because some truth he could know is not proposed to him; or because he departs from a truth that had been proposed and accepted, as when he abandons the way of truth. Such were these Galatians who rejected the truth proposed to them and abandoned the truth of the faith they had accepted: ***I wonder that you are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel*** (Gal 1:6). This, therefore, is the type of senselessness for which he chides them when he says: ***who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth*?**  

**116**. To understand what bewitchment is, it should be noted that according to a Gloss, bewitchment is, properly speaking, a sense delusion usually produced by magical arts; for example, to make a man appear to onlookers as a lion or as having horns. This can also be brought about by demons who have the power to set phantasms in motion as well as to produce in the senses the very alterations that real objects are wont to produce.  

According to this acceptation the Apostle asks, appropriately enough, ***who has bewitched you?*** As if to say: you are as deluded men who take obvious things to be other than they are in very fact, namely, because you are deluded by artifices and sophisms, ***not to obey the truth***, i.e., you neither see the obvious truth received by you nor embrace it by obeying it: *for the bewitching of vanity obscures good things* (Wis 4:12); *woe to you that call evil good, and good evil* (Isa 5:20).  

**117**. In another way bewitchment is taken to mean that someone is harmed by an evil look, particularly when cast by sorcerers whose inflamed eyes and hostile glance cast a spell on boys who grow faint from it and vomit their food.  

Avicenna, attempting to explain this phenomenon in his book *On the Soul*, says that corporeal matter obeys an intellectual substance more than it obeys the active and passive qualities at work in nature. Accordingly, he supposes that through the mental activity of intellectual substance (which he calls the souls or movers of the heavenly spheres) many things occur outside the order of heavenly movements and of all corporeal forces. Along the same lines he says that when a holy soul is purged of all earthly affection and carnal vice, it acquires a likeness to the aforesaid substances, so that nature obeys it. This is why certain holy men achieve marvels that transcend the course of nature. In like manner, because the soul of someone defiled by carnal passions has a vigorous apprehension of malice, nature obeys it to the point of affecting matter, particularly in those in whom the matter is pliant, as in the case of tender children. Thus does it happen, according to him, that from the vigorous apprehension exercised by sorcerers, a child can be evilly affected and bewitched.  

This position seems to be true enough according to Avicenna’s tenets. For he postulates that all material forms in sublunar bodies are influenced by the separated incorporeal substances and that natural agents can be no more than dispositive causes in such matter.  

However, this is disproved by the Philosopher. For an agent should be similar to what is subject to it. Now what comes into existence is not a form alone or matter alone but the composite of matter and form. Consequently, that which acts to produce the existence of corporeal things ought to have matter and form. Therefore he says that the only thing which can cause changes of matter and form is something that itself has matter and form either virtually, as God, who is the maker of form and matter, or actually, as a bodily agent. Therefore with respect to forms of this kind, corporeal matter obeys the nod neither of angels nor of any mere creature but of God alone, as Augustine says. Hence what Avicenna says about this matter of bewitchment is not true.  

Therefore it is better to say that when a man’s act of imagining or apprehending is strong, the sense is affected or at least the sense appetite is now such as affection does not occur without some alteration taking place in the body and the bodily spirits; as, for example, we see that when something pleasant is apprehended, the sense appetite is moved to desire and as a result the body becomes warm. Similarly, as a result of apprehending something horrible, the body grows cold.  

When the spirits are thus moved they mainly infect the eyes, which in turn infect certain things through their glance, as is plain in the case of a clean mirror that becomes defiled when looked into by a woman in her monthly purification. Therefore because sorcerers are obstinate and hardened in evil, their sense appetite is affected by the vigor of their apprehension; as a result, as has been said, the infection moves from the veins to the eyes and thence to the object upon which they look. Accordingly, because the flesh of children is soft, it is influenced and charmed by their hostile glance. And demons, too, can sometimes produce this effect.  

He says, therefore, ***who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth?*** As if to say: you once obeyed the truth of the faith, but now you do not. Therefore, you are as children infected by some hostile glance who vomit the food they have eaten.  

**118**. Then he tells why he rebukes them, when he says, ***before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been set forth, crucified among you***. This can be interpreted in three ways.  

One way, which is according to Jerome, corresponds to the first meaning of bewitchment; as if he says: I say that you are bewitched, because ***before your eyes Jesus Christ has been set forth***, i.e., the outlawing of Christ, who was condemned to death, is as vivid to your eyes as if it were being enacted before your eyes and he was being ***crucified among you***, i.e., the crucifixion of Christ was as clear in your understanding as though it were taking place there. Hence, if you no longer see it, it is because you have been deluded and bewitched. Against such a change of heart, it is said: *put me as a seal upon your heart, as a seal upon your arm* (Song 8:6).  

**119**. Another way, which is according to Augustine, is as if he said: you are justifiably bewitched, because as children, you vomit out the truth you have received, namely, Christ by faith in your hearts. And you do this because ***before your eyes***, i.e., in your presence, ***Jesus Christ has been set forth***, i.e., expelled and refused his inheritance. This should trouble you, because the very one whom you should not allow to be outlawed and expelled by others has been outlawed among you, i.e., has lost his inheritance, namely, yourselves, among you.  

Then that which follows, namely, ***crucified***, should be read as *with a heavy burden and obvious pain*, because he adds this to make them consider the great price Christ paid for the inheritance he lost among them, and thus move them more deeply. As if to say: Christ has been outlawed among you, he who was crucified, i.e., who with his cross and his own blood purchased this inheritance: *you are bought with a great price* (1 Cor 6:20); *knowing that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, as gold or silver . . . but with the precious blood of Christ* (1 Pet 1:18).  

**120**. The third way, which is according to Ambrose, is as though he says: yes, you are bewitched, you, ***before whose eyes***, i.e., in whose opinion, namely, according to your judgment, ***Jesus Christ has been set forth***, i.e., condemned without saving others. ***And among you***, i.e., so far as you understand, he was ***crucified***, i.e., merely died, but justified no one in spite of the fact that it is said of him, *although he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the power of God* (2 Cor 13:4).  

**121**. It can be explained also in a fourth way according to a Gloss to the effect that by these words the Apostle proclaims the gravity of their guilt, because in deserting Christ by observing the law, they sin somewhat on a par with Pilate who set forth Christ, i.e., condemned him. For in believing that Christ does not suffice to save them, they are made to be sinners similar to Christ’s executioners who hung him on the cross, condemning him to a most shameful death and killing him. The parity is taken on the side of the one against whom they sinned, because the Galatians sinned against Christ Jesus as did Pilate and those who crucified Christ.
