# Lecture 1 — The heir awaits the appointed time

^4:1^ As long as the heir is a child, he is no different than a servant, though he be lord of all: [n. 191]  

> ^4:2^ But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed by the father.

> ^4:3^ So we also, when we were children, were serving under the elements of the world. [n. 197]

> **191**. After pointing out the shortcoming of the law, the Apostle then shows here the dignity of grace.

First, with a human example;  

second, with an example from Scripture, at ***tell me, you who desire to be under the law*** (Gal 4:21).  

Regarding the first he does three things:  

first, he shows the pre-eminence of grace over the primitive state of the old law by a simile taken from human law;  

second, he shows that they have been made partakers of this pre-eminence through faith, at ***and because you are sons of God* **(Gal 4:6);  

third, he censures them for disdaining this preeminence, at ***but then indeed, not knowing God* **(Gal 4:8).  

As to the first, he does two things:  

first, he lays down the simile;  

second, he adapts it to his proposition, at ***so we also, when we were children***.  

**192**. It should be noted that the Apostle touches upon four things in the simile he proposes.  

First of all, eminence, because he speaks not of a servant but of an heir. Hence he says, ***as*** ***long as the heir is a child***. This is applied and referred both to the Jewish people—who were the heirs of the promise to Abraham: *for the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself; Israel for his own possession* (Ps 134:4)—and to Christ, who is the heir of all things: *whom he has appointed heir of all things* (Heb 1:2).  

**193**. Second, smallness; hence he says, ***is a child***, because the Jews were children according to the state of the law: *who shall raise up Jacob, for he is a little one?* (Amos 7:5). Similarly, Christ, too, was become a child through the Incarnation: *for a child is born to us and a son is given to us* (Isa 9:6).  

But note that the Apostle sometimes compares the state of the law to a child, as he does here, and sometimes the state of the present life: *when I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child* (1 Cor 13:11). The reason for this is that the state of the old law, because of the imperfection of knowledge, is as a child, compared to the state of grace and truth which came through Christ. In like manner, the state of the present life, in which we see through a mirror in a dark manner, is as a child, compared to the state of the future life, in which there is perfect knowledge of God, because he is seen as he is.  

**194**. Third, subjection, when he says, ***he is no different than* a** ***servant, though he be lord of all: but is under tutors and governors***. For a servant is one who is subject to a lord. But a boy, as long as he is a child, because he does not have fullness of knowledge and use of free will through lack of years, is committed to the care of others who defend his possessions—and these are called tutors—and who handle his affairs—and these are called governors. Therefore, ***though he be lord of all*** his things, yet, in so far as he is subject to others, ***he is no different than a servant***, because he does not have free will but is in fact constrained. And this is applied to the Jewish people: *and now hear, O Jacob, my servant* (Isa 44:1).  

**195**. Here it should be noted that among the Jewish people some were servants in the strict sense; those, namely, who observed the law through fear of punishment and through a desire for the temporal things which the law promised. But there were others who were not servants in the strict sense, but living as servants, were really sons and heirs. These, although outwardly attending to temporal things and avoiding punishments, did not place their end in them but took them as a figure of spiritual goods. Hence, even though on the surface they seemed to differ nothing from servants, inasmuch as they observed the ceremonies and other commandments of the law, they were, nevertheless, lords, because they did not use them with the same frame of mind as servants; for they used them for love of the spiritual goods they prefigured, whereas servants used them chiefly through fear of punishment and with a desire for earthly convenience.  

Christ, too was like a servant, because although he is the Lord of all things according to a psalm: *the Lord said to my Lord* (Ps 109:1), nevertheless outwardly, as man, he seemed no different than a servant: *he emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and in habit found as a man* (Phil 2:7). Furthermore, he was under tutors and governors, because he was made under the law, as is said below: ***made under the law* **(Gal 4:4); he was also subject to men, as is said in Luke: *he was subject to them* (Luke 2:51).  

**196**. Fourth, he touches on the correspondence of time, when he says, ***until the time appointed by the father***, because just as the heir is under tutors for a definite period of time fixed by the father, so the law had a time fixed by God determining how long it was to endure and how long the heir, i.e., the Jewish people, were to be under it. Similarly, there was a time fixed by the Father during which Christ was not to perform miracles or show the lordship of his divine power: *my hour is not yet come* (John 2:4).  

**197**. He applies this simile when he says, ***so we also, when we were children, were serving under the elements of the world***.  

First, he applies it as regarding the Jews;  

second, as regarding Christ, at ***but when the fullness of the time was come* **(Gal 4:4).  

**198**. He says therefore: ***I say that as long as the heir is a child he is no different than a servant; so, we Jews also, when we were children*** in the state of the old law, ***were serving under the elements of the world***, i.e., under the law which promised temporal things—*if you be willing, and will hearken to me, you shall eat the good things of the land* (Isa 1:19)—and threatened temporal punishments.  

Or the old law is called ***element***, because just as boys who are to be trained in a science are first taught the elements of that science and through them are brought to the fullness of science, so to the Jews was proposed the old law through which they would be brought to faith and justice: ***the law was our pedagogue in Christ*** (Gal 3:24).  

Or, ***under the elements***, i.e., the corporeo-religious usages which they observed, such as days of the moon, new moons and the sabbath. But one should not object that on this account they differed nothing from the pagans who served the elements of this world, for the Jews did not serve them or pay them worship; but under them they served and worshipped God, whereas the pagans in serving the elements rendered them divine worship: *they worshipped and served the creature rather than the Creator* (Rom 1:25).  

Furthermore, it was necessary that the Jews serve God under the elements of this world, because such an order is in harmony with human nature which is led from sensible to intelligible things.
