# Lecture 2 — God’s Son comes for adoption

^4:4^ But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent his Son, made of a woman, made under the law: [n. 199]  

> ^4:5^ That he might redeem those who were under the law: that we might receive the adoption of sons. [n. 209]

> **199**. Here the Apostle applies to Christ the simile he has proposed.

First, he makes the application;  

second, he discloses the purpose of the reality that corresponds to the simile, at ***that he might redeem those who were under the law***.  

**200**. It should be noted that above, in the simile he proposed, there were four items pointed out in order, as has been said. But now, in applying them to Christ, he begins with the last, namely, the fixing of a time. The reason for this is that the time in which Christ was humiliated and in which the faithful were exalted turns out to be the same.  

Hence he says: ***but, when the fullness of the time was come***, i.e., after the time fixed by God the Father for sending his Son had been accomplished. This is how it is taken in Luke: *her days were accomplished, that she should be delivered* (Luke 2:6).  

This time is called ‘full’ because of the fullness of the graces that are given in it, according to a psalm: *the river of God is filled with water; you have prepared their food: for so is its preparation* (Ps 65:9). Also because of the fulfillment of the figures of the old law: *I have not come to destroy but to fulfill* (Matt 5:17). And because of the fulfillment of the promises: *and he shall confirm the covenant with many, in one week* (Dan 9:27).  

However, the fact that he likewise says, ***but, when the fullness of time was come***, in other places of Scripture where the time respecting Christ is said to be accomplished, should not be explained in terms of a necessity imposed by fate, but in terms of a divine ordinance, concerning which a psalm states: *by your ordinance the day goes on; for all things serve you* (Ps 119:91).  

**201**. Two reasons are given why that time was pre-ordained for the coming of Christ. One is taken from his greatness: for since he that was to come was great, it was fitting that men be made ready for his coming by many indications and many preparations. *God, who, at sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke in times past to the fathers by the prophets, last of all in these days has spoken to us by his Son* (Heb 1:1).  

The other is taken from the role of the one coming: for since a physician was to come, it was fitting that before his coming, men should be keenly aware of their infirmity, both as to their lack of knowledge during the law of nature and as to their lack of virtue during the written law. Therefore it was fitting that both, namely, the law of nature and the written law, precede the coming of Christ.  

**202**. Second, he applies it as to his dignity as heir, when he says, ***God sent his Son***, namely, his own natural Son; and if Son, then an heir also. He says, ***his Son***, i.e., his own, natural, only begotten but not adopted, Son: *God so loved the world as to give his only begotten Son* (John 3:16). He ***sent*** him, I say, without his being separated from him, for he was sent by assuming human nature, and yet he was in the bosom of the Father: *the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father* eternally (John 1:18); *And no man has ascended into heaven, but he that descended from heaven, the Son of man, who is in heaven* (John 3:13), who, although he descended by assuming flesh is, nevertheless, in heaven.  

Again, ***he sent*** him, not to be where before he was not; because, although he came unto his own by his presence in the flesh, yet by the presence of his Godhead, he was in the world, as is said in John (John 1:14). Furthermore, he did not send him as a minister, because his mission was the assuming of flesh, not the putting off of majesty.  

***God***, therefore, ***sent his Son***, I say, to heal the errantry of the concupiscible part and to illumine the ignorance of the rational part: *he sent his Word and healed them: and delivered them from their destructions* (Ps 106:20). He sent him also to deliver them from the power of the devil against the infirmity of the irascible part: *he shall send them a Savior and defender to deliver them* (Isa 19:20). Also as a deliverer from the chains of eternal death: *I will deliver them out of the hand of death. I will redeem them from death* (Hos 13:14). Also to save them from their sins: *for God sent his Son into the world not to judge the world but that the world may be saved by him* (John 3:17).  

**203**. Third, he applies the simile as to smallness, when he says, ***made of a woman***: *for a child is born to us* (Isa 9:6); *he emptied himself taking the form of a servant* (Phil 2:7).  

He made himself small not by putting off greatness, but by taking on smallness.  

**204**. In interpreting the passage, ***made of woman***, two errors must be avoided; namely, that of Photinus, who said that Christ was solely man and received the beginning of his existence from the Virgin; in other words, that Christ was made of a woman as though deriving his beginning entirely from her.  

But this is false, because it contradicts what is said in Romans: *who was made to him of the seed of David, according to the flesh* (Rom 1:3); he does not say according to his person, which exists from eternity, namely, the hypostasis of the Son of God. Hence, just as when a shield newly comes to be white, it is not proper to say that the very substance of the shield newly came to be, but that the whiteness newly accrued to it; so from the fact that the Son of God newly assumed flesh, it is not proper to say that the person of Christ newly came to be, but that a human nature newly accrued to that person, as when certain things affect a body without that body itself being changed. For certain items affect a thing and change it, such as forms and absolute qualities; but certain other items affect it without changing it. Of this sort is the assuming of flesh precisely as bespeaking a relationship. Hence the person of the Word is in no way changed by it.  

That is why in divine matters we employ in a temporal sense terms that signify a relationship; thus, we say in a psalm: *Lord, you have been our refuge* (Ps 89:1); or we say that God became man. But we do not thus use forms and absolute qualities, so as to say: God was made good or wise and so on.  

**205**. Second, one must avoid the error of Ebion, who said that Christ was born of the seed of Joseph, and who was led to this by the saying, ***born of a woman***. For according to him the word ‘woman’ always implies defloration.  

But this is erroneous, for in Sacred Scripture ‘woman’ also denotes the natural sex, according to Genesis: *Adam said: the woman whom you gave to me to be my companion gave to me of the tree* (Gen 3:12). Here he calls her a woman while she was still a virgin.  

**206**. Furthermore, by saying ***made of a woman*** two errors are destroyed, namely, that of Nestorius saying that Christ did not take his body of the Virgin but of the heavens and that he passed through the Blessed Virgin as through a corridor or channel.  

But this is false, for if it were true, he would not, as the Apostle says, have been made of a woman. By the preposition ***of*** the material cause is denoted.  

**207**. Likewise, the error of Nestorius saying that the Blessed Virgin is not the mother of the Son of God but of the son of a man. But this is shown to be false by the words of the Apostle here, that ***God sent his Son made of a woman***. Now one who is made of a woman is her son. Therefore, if the Son of God was made of a woman, namely, of the Blessed Virgin, it is obvious that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother of the Son of God.  

Moreover, although he might have said *born* of a woman, he distinctly says ***made***, and not *born*. Indeed, for something to be born it must not only be produced of a principle conjoined to it but be made from a principle separate from it. Thus a wooden chest is made by an artisan, but fruit is born from a tree. Now the principle of human generation is twofold, namely, material—and as to this, Christ proceeded from a conjoined principle, because he took the matter of his body from the Virgin; and it is according to this that he is said to be born of her: *of whom was born Jesus who is called Christ* (Matt 1:16). The other is the active principle, which in the case of Christ, so far as he had a principle, i.e., as to the forming of the body, was not conjoined but separate, because the power of the Holy Spirit formed it. And with respect to this he is not said to have been born of a woman, but made, as it were, from an extrinsic principle. From this it is obvious that the saying, ***of a woman***, does not denote a defloration; otherwise he would have said *born* and not ***made***.  

**208**. Fourth, he applies the simile as to its aspect of subjection when he says, ***made under the law***.  

But here a difficulty comes to mind from what is said below, namely: ***if you are*** ***led by the Spirit, you are not under the law*** (Gal 5:18). Hence if Christ is not only spiritual but the giver of the Spirit, it seems unbecoming to say that he was made under the law.  

I answer that ‘to be under the law’ can be taken in two ways: in one way so that ‘under’ denotes the mere observance of the law, and in this sense Christ was made under the law, because he was circumcised and presented in the Temple: *I am not come to destroy but to fulfill* (Matt 5:17). In another way so that ‘under’ denotes oppression. And in this way one is said to be under the law if he is oppressed by fear of the law. But neither Christ nor spiritual men are said to be under the law in this way.  

**209**. Then when he says, ***that he might redeem those who were under the law***, he sets down the fruit of the reality in which the simile is applied, namely, that the reason why he willed they be subject during that time was that they might become heirs, great and free.  

And he mentions both of these things. First, the fruit of freedom as against subjection; hence he says, ***that he might redeem those who were under the law***, i.e., under the curse and burden of the law; ***Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us*** (Gal 3:13).  

Second, the fruit of being made great, inasmuch as we are adopted as sons of God by receiving the Spirit of Christ and being conformed to him: *now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his* (Rom 8:9).  

This adoption belongs in a special way to Christ, because we cannot become adopted sons unless we are conformed to the natural Son: *for whom he foreknew, he also predestined to be made conformable to the image of his Son* (Rom 8:29). With this in mind, he says, ***that we might receive the adoption of sons***, i.e., that through the natural Son of God we might be made adopted sons according to grace through Christ.
