# Lecture 5 — The Galatians’ reception of Paul

^4:12^ Be as I am, because I also am as you: brethren, I beseech you. You have not injured me at all. [n. 228]  

> ^4:13^ And you know how, through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the Gospel to you heretofore: [n. 230]

> ^4:14^ And your temptation in my flesh you did not despise, [n. 232] nor reject: but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. [n. 233]

> ^4:15^ Where then is your blessedness? For I bear you witness that, if it could be done, you would have plucked out your own eyes and would have given them to me. [n. 234]

> ^4:16^ Am I then become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? [n. 235]

> ^4:17^ They are not zealous in your regard in a good way: but they would exclude you, that you might be zealous for them. [n. 238]

> ^4:18^ But be zealous for that which is good in a good thing always: and not only when I am present with you. [n. 240]

> **228**. After censuring the Galatians, the Apostle here shows that he did not do so out of hatred. And

first, he shows that he has no true cause of hatred toward them;  

second, that he has no supposed cause, at ***am I then become your enemy***;  

third, he tells precisely why he rebuked them, at ***my little children* **(Gal 4:19).  

As to the first, he does two things:  

first, he shows that he has no reason for hating them;  

second, that contrariwise he has reason for loving them, at ***and you know how, through infirmity of the flesh***.  

**229**. With respect to the first it should be noted that it is customary for a good pastor in correcting his subjects to mingle gentleness with severity, lest they be discouraged by too great severity. For it is written in Luke 10 that the Samaritan in caring for the wounded man poured in oil and wine. On the other hand, it is written of evil pastors in Ezekiel: *you ruled over them with vigor* (Ezek 34:4).  

Therefore, as a good prelate, the Apostle shows that he does not rebuke them in a spirit of hatred, for his words are gentle in three respects. First, as to the charitable name he uses, for he says, ***brethren***: *behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity* (Ps 133:1). Second, as to his suppliant language, when he says: ***I beseech you***: *the poor will speak with supplications* (Prov 18:28). Third, as to freeing them of blame; hence he says, ***you have not injured me at all***, and I am not the type of person who hates those who do not offend me.  

**230**. Second, he shows that he has reason to love them, when he says: ***you know how, through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the Gospel to you heretofore***. Here he touches on three things that usually cause men to love one another. The first is the mutual help of fellowship, and this is also the cause of love being consolidated among men, according to Luke: *and you are they who have continued with me in my temptations* (Luke 22:28). Touching upon this he says: ***and you know how, through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the Gospel to you heretofore***. Herein he does two things:  

first, he recalls the tribulation he suffered among them;  

second, he shows how they stood by him ***and your temptation***.  

**231**. He says, therefore, with respect to the first: I say that ***you have not injured me at all***; rather you have come to my aid. For** *you know***, i.e., are able to recall, ***how I preached the Gospel to you heretofore***, i.e., in times past, ***through infirmity of the flesh***, i.e., with infirmity and affliction in my flesh, or with the many tribulations I suffered from the Jews who are of my flesh and persecuted me: *and I was with you in weakness and in fear and in much tribulation* (1 Cor 2:3); *power is made perfect in infirmity* (2 Cor 12:9).  

**232**. And although this infirmity might have been reason for scorning me and a cause of temptation for you, according to Zacharias: *strike the shepherd and the sheep will be scattered* (Zech 13:7): nevertheless, ***your temptation***, which was ***in my flesh***, i.e., my tribulation, which was a source of temptation for you, ***you did not despise***: *do not despise a man for his look* (Sir 11:2) because as the Lord says in Luke: *he that despises you, despises me* (Luke 10:16). ***Nor*** did you ***reject*** me and my teaching, but you were willing to share my tribulations: *woe to you that despise; shall you not also be despised?* (Isa 33:1).  

**233**. The second thing that strengthens love among men is mutual love and affection toward one another: *I love them that love me* (Prov 8:17). As to this he says: ***but you received me as an angel of God***, i.e., with the honor accorded to a messenger announcing God’s words: *when you received of us the word of the hearing of God, you received it not as the word of men but (as it is indeed) the word of God* (1 Thess 2:13). For this reason preachers are called angels: *they shall seek the law at the priest’s mouth, because he is the angel of the Lord of hosts* (Mal 2:7).  

And not only as an angel did you receive me, but ***even as Christ Jesus***, i.e., as though Christ himself had come, who, indeed, had come to them in him and spoke in him: *do you seek a proof of Christ that speaks in me?* (2 Cor 13:3). *He that receives you receives me* (Matt 10:40).  

But he then rebukes them for their change of heart; hence he says, ***where then is your blessedness?*** As if to say: did not men think you blessed for honoring me and accepting my preaching? *Where is your fear, your fortitude, your patience and the perfection of your ways?* (Job 4:6)  

**234**. The third thing that strengthens love is doing good to one another. As to this he says: ***for I bear you witness that, if it could be*** ***done***, i.e., had been just to do so (for that can be done which it is just to do) or had been to the advantage of the Church, ***you would have plucked out your own eyes and would have given them*** ***to me***. As if to say: you loved me so much that you would have given me not only your external goods but your very eyes.  

**235**. Then when he says: ***am I then become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?***, he states the cause of a supposed hatred.  

First, the cause on the part of the Apostle;  

second, on the part of the false brethren, at ***they are not zealous in your regard in a good way***.  

**236**. He says therefore: if you have done me so much good, are you to believe that ***I am become your enemy because I tell you the truth?***  

The word ***enemy*** used here can be interpreted in two ways: in one way as meaning that he hates them; in this case the interpretation is ***have I become your enemy***, i.e., do I hate you? Hence what follows, namely, ***because I tell you the truth***, can be taken as an indication of hatred, even though telling the truth at the proper time and place is a sign of love.  

In another way, the word ***enemy*** can be taken in a passive sense, i.e., so that he is hated by them; then ***have I become your enemy***, i.e., do you hate me? and this ***because I tell you the truth***, so that telling the truth is set down as the cause of hatred. For men who tell the truth are hated by evil men, since the truth engenders hatred: *they have hated him that rebukes in the gate: and I have abhorred him that speaks perfectly* (Amos 5:10).  

**237**. But on the other hand, it is said in Proverbs: *he who rebukes a man shall afterward find favor with him more than he who by a flattering tongue deceives him* (Prov 28:23).  

I answer that the solution to this can be gathered from what is said in Proverbs: *rebuke not a scorner, lest he hate you. Rebuke a wise man and he will love you* (Prov 9:9). For if the one corrected loves the corrector, it is a sign of virtue; conversely, it is a sign of malice if he should hate him. For since a man naturally hates what is contrary to what he loves, then if you hate one who corrects you for evil, it is obvious that you love the evil; but if you love him, you indicate that you hate sin. For at first, when men are corrected, they are attached to their sins—that is why a sinner’s first reaction is to hate the one correcting him; but after the correction, he puts aside his attachment to sin and loves the one correcting him. And therefore the passage from Proverbs expressly says that later he will find favor with him.  

**238**. Then when he says, ***they are not zealous in your regard in a good way***, he states another supposed cause, namely, on the part of the false brethren.  

First, he states it;  

second, he refutes it, at ***but be zealous for that which is good***.  

**239**. As to the first it should be noted that, as has been said above, certain false brethren, converted from Judaism, went about the churches of the gentiles, preaching the observance of the law. Because Paul opposed them, they slandered him. They did this not so much with an eye to their salvation as to get rid of Paul.  

Hence the Apostle says, ***they are not zealous in your regard in a good way***, i.e., they do not allow you (whom they love with a love not of friendship but of self-interest) to associate with us. For jealous rivalry is zeal that arises from any love whatsoever and does not brook what is loved to be shared. But because their love for them was not good: first of all, because they did not love them so as to advantage them but for their own gain—and this is obvious from the fact that they wanted to keep the Apostle away from them as one opposed to their own advantage—and second, because this was a source of harm to the Galatians—for they sought from them an advantage by which the latter would suffer harm; for these reasons he says, ***they are zealous in your regard*** but ***not in a good way***, because they are not interested in your welfare. And this is obvious, because ***they would exclude you, that you might be zealous for them***, i.e., that you might admit none but them: *do not envy the unjust man and do not follow his ways* (Prov 3:31); *do not let your heart envy sinners* (Prov 23:17).  

**240**. But he rejects this when he says, ***but be zealous for that which is good in a good thing always***. As if to say: you ought not to be zealous for them in their teaching; but be zealous for a good teacher, i.e., for me and those like me: *and who is he that can hurt you if you be zealous of the good?* (1 Pet 3:13).  

But because there can be evil in a good teacher, he adds, ***be zealous of the good*** teacher, yet say ***in a good thing***, i.e., in that which is good: *follow after charity and be zealous for spiritual goods* (1 Cor 14:1). Now, although the Apostle speaks of himself, according to a Gloss, when he says, ***be zealous of the good***, yet he adds ***in a good thing***, because as he says: *I am not conscious of anything, yet I am not hereby justified* (1 Cor 4:4).  

But because some are zealous for a good teacher in his presence alone, he adds: ***always, and not only when I am present with you***; because zeal for the good, if it continues even when the teacher is absent, is an indication that it proceeds from love and fear of God who sees all: *servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh, not serving to the eye, as pleasing men, but in simplicity of heart, fearing God* (Col 3:22).
