# Article 4 — On the Eucharist

The third sacrament is the holy eucharist. Its matter is wheaten bread and wine from the grape mixed with a little water so that the water becomes part of the wine. The water signifies the faithful who are incorporated into Christ. Other than wheaten bread and wine from the grape cannot be the matter for this sacrament. The form of this sacrament is the very words of Christ, *this is my body*, and *this is the chalice of my blood of the new and eternal testament; the mystery of faith; which shall be shed for you and for many, for the remission of sins*. These words spoken by the priest in the person of Christ brings into being this sacrament. The minister of this sacrament is the priest; and no one else can consecrate this matter into the body of Christ.  

The effect of this sacrament is twofold: first, in the very consecration of the sacrament, since in virtue of the above words bread is changed into the body of Christ, and wine into his blood; so that Christ is entirely contained under the appearances of bread which remain without a subject; and Christ is entirely contained under the appearances of wine. And, moreover, under each part of the consecrated host and of the consecrated wine, Christ is totally present even after the separation is made. The second effect of this sacrament, which is brought about in the soul of one who worthily receives it, is the union of man with Christ, as he himself says: *he who eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me and I in him* (John 6:57). And since man is incorporated with Christ and united to his members through grace, it follows that through this sacrament grace is increased in those who receive it worthily. Thus, therefore, in this sacrament there is that which is the sacrament alone (*sacramentum tantum*), that is, the species of bread and wine; and that which is known as the *res et sacramentum*, that is, the true body of Christ; and that which is the *res tantum*, that is the unity of the mystical body, that is, the Church which this sacrament both signifies and causes.  

There have been many errors regarding this sacrament. The first error is of those who say that in this sacrament is not the true body of Christ but only a sign of it. The author of this error is said to be Berengarius against whom it is written: *for my flesh is meat indeed; and my blood is drink indeed* (John 6:56).  

The second is the error of the Arrodinici, who *offer in their sacrament bread and cheese because they say men at first made offerings of the fruits of the earth and of their flocks*. Against this, however, stands the fact that the Lord who is the institutor of this sacrament gave to his disciples bread and wine.  

The third is the error of the Cataphrygae and the Praeputiati, who drew the blood of an infant from tiny punctures in its body, and mixing this with flour made a bread of it; and thus asserted that they consecrated the sacrament. This is more like the sacrifices of demons than that of Christ, according to the Psalm: *and they shed innocent blood which they sacrificed to the idols of Chanaan* (Ps 105:38).  

The fourth is the error of the Aquarii, who offer water only in their sacrifices. But against this are the words from the mouth of wisdom, which is Christ: *drink the wine which I have mingled for you* (Prov 9:5).  

The fifth is the error of the Ophites, who considering the serpent to be Christ, have a snake lick with its tongue the customary bread as if thereby to consecrate the Eucharist for them.  

The sixth is the error of the Praeputiati, who assign to women the role of priests.  

The seventh is the error of the Poor of Lyons who hold that any just man can consecrate this sacrament. Against such errors is the fact that the Lord gave to the apostles the power to celebrate this sacrament; and hence only those who receive this power in a certain succession from the apostles can consecrate this sacrament.  

The eighth is the error of certain ones called Adamites, who imitating the nakedness of Adam, gather together naked, both men and women, to listen to readings naked, to pray naked, to celebrate the sacraments naked; against whom it is said: *But let all things be done among you decently and according to order* (1 Cor 14:40).
