# Lecture 6

31. The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying to him, Get you out, and depart hence: for Herod will kill you.  

> 32. And he said to them, Go you, and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.

> 33. Nevertheless I must walk today, and tomorrow, and the day following: for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.

> 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which kills the prophets, and stones them that are sent to you; how often would I have gathered your children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and you would not!

> 35. Behold, your house is left to you desolate: and verily I say to you, You shall not see me until the time come when you shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

> **CYRIL**; The preceding words of our Lord roused the Pharisees to anger. For they perceived that the people were now smitten in their hearts, and eagerly receiving His faith. For fear then of losing their office as rulers of the people, and lacking their gains, with pretended love for Him, they persuade Him to depart from hence, as it is said, The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying to him, Get you out and depart hence, for Herod will kill you: but Christ, who searches the heart and the reins, answers them meekly and under figure. Hence it follows, And he said to them, Go you and tell that fox.

**BEDE**; Because of his wires end stratagems He calls Herod a fox, which is an animal full of craft, concealing itself in a ditch because of snares, having a noisome smell, never walking in straight paths, all which things belong to heretics, of whom Herod is a type, who endeavors to destroy Christ (that is, the humility of the Christian faith) in the hearts of believers.  

**CYRIL**; Or else the discourse seems to change here, and not to refer so much to the character of Herod as some think, as to the lies of the Pharisees. For He almost represents the Pharisees themselves to be standing near, when He said, Go tell this fox, as it is in the Greek. Therefore he commanded them to say that which might rouse the multitude of Pharisees. Behold, said He, I cast out devils, and I do cures to day and to morrow, and on the third day I shall be perfected. He promises to do what was displeasing to the Jews, namely, to command the evil spirits, and deliver the sick from disease, until in His own person He should undergo the suffering of the cross. But because the Pharisees thought that He who was the Lord of hosts, feared the hand of Herod. He refutes this, saying, Nevertheless I must walk today and tomorrow, and the day following. When He says must, He by no means implies a necessity imposed upon Him, but rather that He walked where He liked according to the inclination of His wild, until He should come to the end of the dreadful cross, the time of which Christ shows to be now drawing near, when He says, Today and tomorrow,  

**THEOPHYL**. As if He says, What think you of My death? Behold, a little while, and it will come to pass. But by the words, Today and tomorrow, are signified many days; as we also are wont to say in common conversation, “Today and tomorrow such a thing takes place,” not that it happens in that interval of time. And to explain more clearly the words of the Gospel, you must not understand them to be, I must walk to day and to morrow, but place a stop after today and tomorrow, then add, and walk on the day following, as frequently in reckoning we are accustomed to say, “The Lord’s day and the day after, and on the third I will go out,” as if by reckoning two, to denote the third. So also our Lord speaks as if calculating, I must do so to day, and so to morrow, and then afterward on the third day I must go to Jerusalem.  

**AUG**. Or these things are understood to have been spoken mystically by Him, so as to refer to His body, which is the Church. For devils are cast out when the Gentiles having forsaken their superstition, believe in Him. And cures are perfected when according to His commands, after having renounced the devil and this world until the end of the resurrection, (by which as it were the third day will be completed,) the Church shall be perfected in angelical fullness by the immortality also of the body.  

**THEOPHYL**. But because they said to Him, Depart from hence, for Herod seeks to kill you, speaking in Galilee where Herod reigned, He shows that not in Galilee, but in Jerusalem it had been fore-ordained that He should suffer. Hence it follows, For it can not be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. When you hear, It can not be (or it is not fitting) that a prophet should perish out of Jerusalem, think not that any violent constraint was imposed upon the Jews, but He says this seasonably with reference to their eager desire after blood; just as if any one seeing a most savage robber, should say, the road on which this robber lurks can not be without bloodshed to travelers. So also no where else but in the abode of robbers must the Lord of the prophets perish. For accustomed to the blood of His prophets, they will also kill the Lord; as it follows, O Jerusalem, which kills the prophets.  

**BEDE**; In calling upon Jerusalem, He addresses not the stones and buildings of the city, but the dwellers therein, and He weeps over it with the affection of a father.  

**CHRYS**. For the twice repeated word betokens compassion or very great love. For the Lord speaks, if we may say it, as a lover would to his mistress who despised him, and was therefore about to be punished.  

**GREEK EX**. But the repetition of the name also shows the rebuke to be severe. For she who knew God, how does she persecute God’s ministers?  

**CYRIL**; Now that they were unmindful of the Divine blessings He proves as follows, How often would I have gathered your children together as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and you would not. He led them by the hand of Moses out of all wisdom, He warns them by His prophets, He wished to have them under His wings, (i.e. under the shelter of His power,) but they deprived themselves of these choice blessings, through their ingratitude.  

**AUG**. As many as I gathered together, it was done by my all prevailing will, yet your unwillingness, for you were ever ungrateful.  

**BEDE**; Now He who aptly had called Herod a fox, who was plotting His death, compares Himself to a bird, for foxes are ever lying in wait for birds.  

**BASIL**; He compared also the sons of Jerusalem to birds in n the net, as if He said, Birds who are used to fly in the air are caught by the treacherous devices of the catchers, but you shall be as a chicken in want of another’s protection; when your mother then has fled away, you are taken from your nest as too weak to defend yourself; too feeble to fly; as it follows, Behold, your house is left to you desolate.  

**BEDE**; The city itself which He had called the nest, He now calls the house of the Jews; for when our Lord was slain, the Romans came, and plundering it as a deserted nest, took away both their place, nation, and kingdom.  

**THEOPHYL**. Or your house, (that is, temple,) as if He says, As long as there was virtue in you, it was my temple, but after that you made it a den of thieves, it was no more my house but yours. Or by house He meant the whole Jewish nation, according to the Psalm, O house of Jacob, bless you the Lord, by which he shows that it was He Himself who governed them, and took them out of the hand of their enemies. It follows, And verily I say to you, &c.  

**AUG**. There seems nothing opposed to St. Luke’s narrative, in what the multitudes said when our Lord came to Jerusalem, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, for He had not as yet come thither nor had this yet been spoken.  

**CYRIL**; For our Lord had departed from Jerusalem, as it were abandoning those who were unworthy of His presence, and afterwards returned to Jerusalem, having performed many miracles, when that crowd meets Him, saying, Osanna to the Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.  

**AUG**. At But as Luke does not say to what place our Lord went from thence, so that He should not come except at that time, (for when this was spoken He was journeying onward until He should come to Jerusalem,) He means therefore to refer to that coming of His, when He should appear in glory.  

**THEOPHYL**. For then also will they unwillingly confess Him to be their Lord and Savior, when there shall be no departure hence. But in saying, You shall not see me until he shall come, &c. does not signify that present hour, but the time of His cross; as if He says, When you have crucified Me, you shall no more see Me until I come again.  

**AUG**. Luke must be understood then as wishing to anticipate here, before his narrative brought our Lord to Jerusalem, or to make Him when approaching the same city, give an answer to those who told Him to beware of Herod, like to that which Matthew says He gave when He had already reached Jerusalem.  

**BEDE**; you shall not see, that is, unless you have worked repentance, and confessed Me to be the Son of the Father Almighty, you shall not see My face at the second coming.
