# Lecture 3

15. And they brought to him also infants, that he would touch them: but when his disciples saw it, they rebuked them.  

> 16. But Jesus called them to him, and said, Suffer little children to come to me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.

> 17. Verily I say to you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein.

> **THEOPHYL**. After what He had said, our Lord teaches us a lesson of humility by His own example; He does not turn away the little children who are brought to Him, but graciously receives them.

**AUG**. To whom are they brought to be touched, but to the Savior? And as being the Savior they are presented to Him to be saved, who came to save that which was lost. But with regard to these innocents, when w ere they lost? The Apostle says, By one man sin entered into the world. Let then the little children come as the sick to a physician, the lost to their Redeemer.  

**AMBROSE**; It may be thought strange by some that the disciples wished to prevent the little children from coming to our Lord, as it is said, when they saw it, they rebuked them. But we must understand in this either a mystery, or the effect of their love to Him. For they did it not from envy or harsh feeling towards the children, but they manifested a holy zeal in their Lord’s service, that he might not be pressed by the crowds. Our own interest must be given up where an injury is threatened to God. But we may understand the mystery to be, that they desired the Jewish people to be first saved, of whom they were according to the flesh. They knew indeed the mystery, that to both nations the call was to be made, (for they entreated for the Canaanitish woman,) but perhaps they were still ignorant of the order. It follows, But Jesus called them to him, and said, Suffer little children, &c. One age is not preferred to another, else it were hurtful to grow up. But why does He say that children are fitter for the kingdom of heaven? It is because they are ignorant of guile, are incapable of theft, dare not return a blow, are unconscious of lust, have no desire for wealth, honors, or ambition. But to be ignorant of these things is not virtue, we must also despise them. For virtue consists not in our inability to sin, but in our unwillingness. Childhood then is not meant here, but that goodness which rivals the simplicity of childhood.  

**BEDE**; If Hence our Lord pointedly says, of such, not “of these,” to show that to character, not to age, is the kingdom given, and to such as have a childlike innocence and simplicity is the promise of the reward.  

**AMBROSE**; Lastly, our Savior expressed this when He said, Verily I say to you, Whoever will not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, &c. What child were Christ’s Apostles to imitate but Him of whom Esaias speaks, Unto us a Child is given? Who when He was reviled, reviled not again. So that there is in childhood a certain venerable antiquity, and in old age a childlike innocence.  

**BASIL**; We shall receive the kingdom of God as a child if we are disposed towards our Lord’s teaching as a child under instruction, never contradicting nor disputing with his masters, but trustfully and teachably imbibing learning.  

**THEOPHYL**. The wise men of the Gentiles therefore who seek for wisdom in a mystery, which is the kingdom of God, and will not receive this without the evidence of logical proof, are rightly shut out from this kingdom.
