# Lecture 4

37. And when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had seen;  

> 38. Saying, Blessed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.

> 39. And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said to him, Master, rebuke your disciples.

> 40. And he answered and said to them, I tell you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.

> **ORIGEN**; As long as our Lord was in the mount His Apostles only were with Him, but when He began to be near the descent, then there came to Him a multitude of the people.

**THEOPHYL**. He calls by the name of disciples not only the twelve, or the seventy-two, but all who followed Christ, whether for the sake of the miracles, or from a certain charm in His teaching, and to them may be added the children, as the other Evangelists relate. Hence it follows, For all the mighty works which they had seen.  

**BEDE**; They beheld indeed many of our Lord’s miracles, but marveled most at the resurrection of Lazarus. For as John says, For this cause the people also met him, for that they heard that he had done this miracle. For it must be observed that this was not the first time of our Lord’s coming to Jerusalem, but He came often before, as John relates.  

**AMBROSE**; The multitude then acknowledging God, proclaims Him King, repeats the prophecy, and declares that the expected Son of David according to the flesh had come, saying, Blessed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord.  

**BEDE**; That is, in the name of God the Father, although it might be taken “in His own name,” since He Himself is the Lord. But His own words are better guides to the meaning when He says, I am come in my Father’s name. For Christ is the Master of humility. Christ is not called King as one who exacts tribute, or arms His forces with the sword, or visibly crushes His enemies, but because He rules men’s minds, and brings them believing, hoping, and loving into the kingdom of heaven. For He was willing to be King of Israel, to show His compassion, not to increase His power. But because Christ appeared in the flesh, as the redemption and light of the whole world, well do both the heaven and earth, each in their turn, chant His praises. When He is born into the world, the heavenly hosts sing; when He is about to return to heaven, men send back their note of praise. As it follows, Peace in heaven.  

**THEOPHYL**. That is, the ancient warfare, wherein we were at enmity against God, has ceased. And glory in the highest, inasmuch as Angels are glorifying God for such a reconciliation. For this very thing, that God visibly walks in the land of His enemies, shows that He has peace with us. But the Pharisees when they heard that the crowd called Him King, and praised Him as God, murmured, imputing the name of King to sedition, the name of God to blasphemy. And some of the Pharisees said, Master, rebuke your disciples.  

**BEDE**; O the strange folly of the envious; they scruple not to call Him Master, because they knew He taught the truth, but His disciples, as though themselves were better taught they deem worthy of rebuke.  

**CYRIL**; But the Lord forbade not them that glorified Him as God, but rather forbade those that blamed them, so bearing witness to Himself concerning the glory of the Godhead. Hence it follows, He answered and said to them, I tell you, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.  

**THEOPHYL**. As if He said, Not without cause do men praise me thus, but being constrained by the mighty works which they have seen.  

**BEDE**; And so at the crucifixion of our Lord, when His kinsfolk were silent from fear, the stones and rocks sang forth, while after that He gave up the ghost, the earth was moved, and the rocks were rent, and the graves opened.  

**AMBROSE**; Nor is it wonderful that the stones against their nature should chant forth the praises of the Lord, whom His murderers, harder than the rocks, proclaim aloud, that is, the multitude, in a little while about to crucify their God, denying Him in their hearts, whole with their mouths they confess. Or perhaps it is said; because, when the Jews were struck silent after the Lord’s Passion, the living stones, as Peter calls them, were about to cry out.  

**ORIGEN**; When we also are silent, (that is, when the love of many wax cold,) the stones cry out, for God can from stones raise up children to Abraham.  

**AMBROSE**; Rightly we read that the crowds praising God met Him at the descent of the mountain, that they might signify that the works of the heavenly mystery had come to them from heaven.  

**BEDE**; Again, when our Lord descends from the mount of Olives, the multitude descend also, because since the Author of mercy has suffered humiliation, it is necessary that all those who need His mercy should follow His footsteps.
