# Lecture 1

1. And it came to pass, that on one of those days, as he taught the people in the temple, and preached the Gospel, the Chief Priests and the Scribes came upon him with the elders,  

> 2. And spoke to him, saying, Tell us, by what authority do you these things? or who is he that gave you this authority?

> 3. And he answered and said to them, I will also ask you one thing; and answer me:

> 4. The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?

> 5. And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why then believed you him not?

> 6. But and if we say, Of men; all the people will stone us: for they be persuaded that John was a prophet.

> 7. And they answered, that they could not tell whence it was.

> 8. And Jesus said to them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.

> **AUG**. Having related the casting out of those that bought and sold in the temple, Luke omits Christ’s going to Bethany; and His return again to the city, and the circumstances of the fig-tree, and the answer which was made to the astonished disciples, concerning the power of faith. And having omitted all these, as he does not, like Mark, pursue the events of each day in order, he commences with these words, And it came to pass, that on one of those days; by which we may understand that day on which Matthew and Mark related that event to have taken place.

**EUSEBIUS**. But the rulers who should have been struck with wonder at one who taught such heavenly doctrines, and have been convinced by His words and deeds that this was the same Christ whom the Prophets had foretold, came to hinder Him, so helping onward the destruction of the people. For it follows, And spoke to him saying, Tell us, by what authority do you these things? &c.  

As if he said; By the law of Moses, those only who are sprung from the blood of Levi have authority to teach, and power over the sacred buildings. But you who are of the line of Judah usurp the offices assigned to us. Whereas O Pharisee, if you had known the Scriptures, you would have called to mind that this is the Priest after the order of Melchisedec, who offers to God them that believe on Him by that worship which is above the law. Why then are you troubled. He cast out of the sacred house things which seemed necessary for the sacrifices of the law, because He calls us by, faith to the true righteousness.  

**BEDE**; Or when they say, By what authority do you these things? they doubt concerning the power of God, and wish it to be understood that of the devil He does this. Adding moreover, And who is he that gave you this authority. Most plainly do they deny the Son of God when they think that not by His own power but another’s He does miracles. Now our Lord by a simple answer might have refuted such a calumny; but He wisely asks a question, that by their silence or their words they might condemn themselves. And he answered and said to them. I also will ask, &c.  

**THEOPHYL**. For that He might show that they had always rebelled against the Holy Spirit, and that resides Isaiah, whom they remembered not, they had refused to believe John whom they had lately seen; He now in his turn puts the question to them, proving that if so great a Prophet as John who was accounted greatest among them had been disbelieved when he testified of Him, the would in no wise believe Him, answering by what authority He did this.  

**EUSEBIUS**. His question concerning John the Baptist is not from whence was he sprung, but whence received he his law of baptism.  

But they feared not to shun the truth. For God sent John as a voice, crying, Prepare you the way of the Lord. But they dreaded to speak the truth, lest it should be said, Why did you not believe? and they scruple to blame the forerunner, not from fear of God, but of the people; as it follows, And they reasoned within themselves, saying, If we shall say, From hearer; he will say, Why then believed you him not.  

**BEDE**; As if He should say, He whom you confess bad his gift of prophecy from heaven, and gave testimony to Me. And you heard from him by what power I should do these things. It follows, But if we shall say, Of men; the whole people will stone us: for they be persuaded that John was a prophet Therefore perceived they in whatever way they should answer they would fall into a trap, fearing the stoning, but much more the confession of the truth. And then it follows, And they answered, that they could not tell whence it was. Because they will not confess that which they knew, they were baffled, and the Lord would not tell them what He knew; as it follows, And Jesus said to them, Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things. For there are two reasons especially why we should conceal the truth from those that ask; for example, when the questioner is incapable of understanding what he asks, or when from hatred or contempt he is unworthy to have his questions answered.
