# Lecture 3

***7. Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the Passover must be killed.***

> 8. And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the Passover, that we may eat.

> 9. And they said to him, Where will you that we prepare?

> 10. And he said to them, Behold, when you are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he enters in.

> 11. And you shall say to the goodman of the house, The Master said to you, Where is the guest-chamber, where I shall eat the Passover with my disciples?

> 12. And he shall show you a large upper room furnished: there make ready.

> 13. And they went, and found as he had said to them: and they made ready the Passover.

> **TITUS BOST**. Our Lord, in order to leave us a heavenly Passover, ate a typical one, removing the figure, that the truth might take its place.

**BEDE**; By the day of unleavened bread of the Passover, He means the fourteenth day of the first month, the day on which, having put away the leaven, they were accustomed to hold the Passover, that is, the lamb, towards evening.  

**EUSEBIUS**. But should any one say, “If on the first day of unleavened bread the disciples of our Savior prepare the Passover, on that day then should we also celebrate the Passover;” we answer, that this was not an admonition, but a history of the fact. It is what took place at the time of the saving Passion; but it is one thing to relate past events, another to sanction and leave them an ordinance to posterity. Moreover, the Savior did not keep His Passover with the Jews at the time that they sacrificed the lamb. For they did this on the Preparation, when our Lord suffered. Therefore they entered not into the hall of Pilate, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the Passover. For from the time that they conspired against the truth, they drove far from them the Word of truth. Nor on the first day of unleavened bread, on which the Passover ought to be sacrificed, did they eat their accustomed Passover, for they were intent upon something else, but on the day after, which was the second of unleavened bread. But our Lord on the first day of unleavened bread, that is, on the fifth day of the week, kept the Passover with His disciples.  

**THEOPHYL**. Now on the same fifth day He sends two of His disciples to prepare the Passover, namely, Peter and John the one in truth as loving, the other as loved. In all things showing, that even to the end of His life He opposed not the law. And He sends them to a strange house; for He and His disciples had no house, else would He have kept the Passover in one of them. So it is added, And they said Where will you that we prepare?  

**BEDE**; As if to sad, We have no abode, we have no place of shelter. Let those hear this, who busy themselves in building houses. Let them know that Christ, the Lord of all places, had no where to lay His head.  

**CHRYS**. But as they knew not to whom they were sent, He gave them a sign, as Samuel to Saul, as it follows, And he told to them, Behold, when you are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he enters in.  

**AMBROSE**; First observe the greatness of His divine power. He is talking with His disciples, yet knows what will happen in another place. Next behold His condescension, in that He chooses not the person of the rich or powerful, but seeks after the poor, and prefers a mean inn to the spacious palaces of nobles. Now the Lord was not ignorant of the name of the man whose mystery He knew, and that he would meet the disciples, but he is mentioned without a name, that he may be counted as ignoble.  

**THEOPHYL**. He sends them for this reason to an unknown man: to show them that He voluntarily underwent His Passion, since He who so swayed the mind of one unknown to Him, that He should receive them, was able to deal with the Jews just as He wished. But some say that He gave not the name of the men, lest the traitor knowing his name might open the house to the Pharisees, and they should have come and taken Him before that the supper was eaten, and He had delivered the spiritual mysteries to was disciples. But He directs them by particular signs to a certain house; whence it follows, And you shall say to the goodman of the house, The Master said, Where is the guest-chamber, &c. And he will show you an upper room, &c.  

**GLOSS**. And perceiving these signs, the disciples zealously fulfilled all that had been commanded them; as it follows, And they went and found as he had said to them, and made ready the Passover.  

**BEDE**; To explain this Passover, the Apostle says, Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. Which Passover in truth must needs have been slain there, as it was so ordained by the Father’s counsel and determination. And thus although on the next day, that is, the fifteenth, He was crucified, yet, on this night on which the lamb was slain by the Jews, being seized and bound, He consecrated the beginning of His sacrifice, that is, of His Passion.  

**THEOPHYL**. By the day of unleavened bread, we must understand that conversation which is wholly in the light of the Spirit, having lost all trace of the old corruption of Adam’s first transgression. And living in this conversation, it becomes us to rejoice in the mysteries of Christ. Now these mysteries Peter and John prepare, that is, action and contemplation, fervid zeal and peaceful meekness. And these preparers a certain man meets, because in what we have just mentioned, lies the condition of man who was created after the image of God. And he carries a pitcher of water, which signifies the grace of the Holy Spirit. But the pitcher is humbleness of heart; for He gives grace to the humble, who know themselves to be but earth and dust.  

**AMBROSE**; Or the pitcher is a more perfect measure, but the water is that which was thought meet to be a sacrament of Christ; to wash, not to be washed.  

**BEDE**; They prepare the Passover in that house, whither the pitcher of water is carried, for the time is at hand in which to the keepers of the true Passover, the typical blood is taken away from the lintel, and the baptism of the life giving fountain is consecrated to take away sin.  

**ORIGEN**, But I think that the man who meets the disciples as they enter into the city, carrying a pitcher of water, was some servant of a master of a house, carrying water in an earthen vessel either for washing or for drinking. And this I think is Moses conveying the spiritual doctrine in fleshly histories. But they who follow him not, do not celebrate the Passover with Jesus. Let us then ascend with the Lord united to us, to the upper part in which is the guest-chamber, which is shown by the understanding, that is, the goodman of the house, to every one of the disciples of Christ. But this upper room of our house must be large enough to receive Jesus the Word of God, who is not comprehended but by those who are greater in comprehension. And this chamber must be made ready by the goodman of the house, (that is, the understanding,) for the Son of God, and it must be cleaned, wholly purged of the filth of malice. The master of the house also must not be any common person having a known name. Hence He says mystically in Matthew, Go you to such a one.  

**AMBROSE**; Now in the upper parts he has a large room furnished, that you may consider how great were his merits in whom the Lord could sit down with His disciples, rejoicing in His exalted virtues.  

**ORIGEN**; But we should know that they who are taken up with banquetings and worldly cares do not ascend into that upper part of the house, and therefore do not keep the Passover with Jesus. For after the words of the disciples wherewith they questioned the goodman of the house, (that is, the understanding,) the Divine Person came into that house to feast there with His disciples.
