# Book II, Letter 36

*To the Abbot Eusebius.*

Gregory to Eusebius, etc.

Let your Charity believe me that I have been greatly saddened for your sadness, as though I had myself suffered wrong in you. But, when I afterwards learned that, even after the most reverend Maximianus, our brother and fellow bishop, had restored you to his favour and communion, your Love would not accept communion from him, I then knew that what had been done before was just. The humility of God's servants ought to appear in a time of affliction: but those who lift themselves up against their superiors show that they scorn to be God's servants. And, indeed, what he once did ought not to have been done; but still it ought to have been taken by you with all humility: and again, when he restored to you his favour, he ought to have been met with thanks. And because it was not so done by you, I feel that to us in every way there is cause for tears. For it is no great thing for us to be humble to those by whom we are honoured; for even any worldly man would do this: but we ought especially to be humble to those at whose hands we suffer. For the Psalmist says, *See my humility before mine enemies* Psalm 9:14. What life are we leading, if we will not be humble even to our fathers? Wherefore, most beloved son, I beseech you that all bitterness pass away from your heart, lest perchance the end should be near, and the ancient foe should, through the iniquity of discord, bar against us the way to the eternal kingdom. Further, we have caused a hundred *solidi* to be given to your Love through Peter the subdeacon, which I beg you to accept without offense.
