# Book VI, Letter 35

*To Anthemius, Subdeacon.*

Gregory to Anthemius, our Neapolitan Sub-deacon.

How great is our grief, and how great the affliction of our heart, from what has taken place in the regions of Campania we cannot express; but you may yourself gather it from the greatness of the calamity. With regard to this state of things, we send your Experience by the magnificent Stephen, bearer of these presents, money for the succour of the captives who have been taken, admonishing you that thou give your whole attention to the business, and carry it out strenuously; and, in the case of freemen whom you know to have no sufficient means for their own redemption, that you make haste to redeem them. But, should there be any slaves, and you find that their masters are so poor that they cannot come forward to redeem them, hesitate not to recover them also. In like manner also you will take care to redeem the slaves of the Church who have been lost by your neglect. Further, whomsoever you shall have redeemed, you will by all means be at pains to make out a list, containing their names, and a statement of where each is staying, and what he is doing, and where he came from; which list you may bring with you when you come. Moreover, hasten to show yourself so diligent in this business that those who are to be redeemed may incur no risk through your negligence, or thou come afterwards to be highly culpable before us. But work especially for this also; that, if possible, you may be able to recover those captives at a moderate price. But set down in writing, with all clearness and nicety, the whole sum expended, and transmit to us this your written account with speed. The month of May, Indiction 14.
