# Adonai

*Hebrew meaning 'lord, ruler', a name bestowed upon God in the Old Testament*

Adonai (Hebrew meaning "lord, ruler") is a name bestowed upon God in the Old Testament. It is retained in the Vulgate and its dependent versions, Exodus 6:3; Judith 16:16. No other name applied to God is more definite and more easily understood than this. Etymologically it is the plural of *Adon*, with the suffix of the possessive pronoun, first person, singular number. This plural has been subjected to various explanations. It may be looked upon as a *plurale abstractum*, and as such it would indicate the fullness of divine sway and point to God as the Lord of lords. This explanation has the endorsement of Hebrew grammarians, who distinguish a *plurale virium*, or *virtutum*. Others prefer to designate this form as *plurale excellentiæ*, *magnitudinis*, or *plurale majestatis*. To look upon it as a form of politeness such as the German *Sie* for *du*, or French *volts* for to is certainly not warranted by Hebrew usage. The possessive pronoun has no more significance in this word than it has in *Rabbi* (my master), *Monsieur*, or *Madonna*. Adonai is also the perpetual substitute for the ineffable Name *Yahve*, to which it lends its vowel signs. Whenever therefore, the word *Yahve* occurs in the text, the Jew will read Adonai.

## Sources

KAUTZSCH-GESENTIUS *Hebræische Grammatik* (Leipzig, 1896), DALMAN *Der Gottesname and seine Geschichte* (Berlin, 1889); STADE, *Biblische Theologie des Alten Testaments* (Tübingen, 1905).
