# Joseph Franz Allioli

*Studied theology at Landshut, was ordained at Ratisbon, 1816, studied Oriental languages (1818-20), became professor in the University at Landshut in 1824, and was transferred with the university to Munich in 1826, but owing to a weak throat he had to accept a canonry at Ratisbon. Became Dean of the chapter at Augsburg, in 1838*

Born at Sulzbach, 10 August, 1793; died at Augsburg, 22 May, 1873. He studied theology at Landshut, was ordained at Ratisbon, 1816, studied Oriental languages at Vienna, Rome, and Paris (1818-20), became professor in the University at Landshut in 1824, and was transferred with the university to Munich in 1826, but owing to a weak throat he had to accept a canonry at Ratisbon. in 1835, and became Dean of the chapter at Augsburg, in 1838.

His works are: "Aphorismen Über den Zusammenhang der heiligen Schrift Alten und Neuen Testaments, aus der Idee des Reichs Gottes" (Ratisbon 1819); "Häusliche Alterthümer der Hebräer nebst biblischer Geographie" (1821); "Biblische Alterthümer" (Landshut, 1825); "Handbuch der biblischen Alterthumskunde" (in cooperation with Grätz and Haneberg, Landshut, 1843-44); "Übersetzung der heiligen Schriften Alten und Neuen Testaments, aus der Vulgata, mit Bezug auf den Grundtext, neu übersetzt und mit kurzen Anmerkungen erläutert, dritte Auflage von Allioli umgearbeitet" (6 vols., Nürnberg, 1830-35). This work received a papal approbation, 11 May, 1830.

## Sources

HERGENRÖTHER in *Kirchenlex.*; WETZER UND WELTE, *Konversations-Lexikon*, 3 ed. (St. Louis, 1902); VIG., *Dict. de la bible* (Paris, 1895).
