# Anthony of Sienna

*A Dominican theologian, so called because of his great veneration for St. Catharine of Sienna*

A Dominican theologian, so called because of his great veneration for St. Catharine of Sienna, b. near Braga in Portugal, hence sometimes known as "Lusitanus"; d. at Nantes, 2 January, 1585. He studied at Lisbon, Coimbra, and Louvain, taught philosophy for several years in the latter place, where he was made Doctor of Theology in 1571, and put in charge of the Dominican college there in 1574. He supported the Portuguese pretender Antonio de Beja, and was banished from the Spanish dominions, after which he travelled for scientific purposes in Italy, England, and France. He was one of the collaborators in the Roman edition of St. Thomas's works (1570-71) prepared by order of St. Pius V. He published (Antwerp, 1569) an edition of the "Summa Theologica" with exact indication of all authors, sacred and profane, quoted by the Saint, and (ib., 1571) a similar edition of the "Quaestiones Disputatae" and other "opuscula" of St. Thomas. The commentary on Genesis, edited by him two years later at Antwerp as a work of St. Thomas, is not authentic. His edition of the Saint's commentary on Machabees, prepared at Paris in 1584, was published in 1612 by Come Morelles, O.P., in the Antwerp edition of the works of St. Thomas. He also brought out (Paris, 1585) a "Chronicon" and "Bibliotheca Ordinis Praedicaturum".

## Sources

Quetif-Echard, *SS. O.P.,* I, 271; MANDONNET in *Dict. de Theol. Cath.* I, 1447.
