# Arnold

*Name of several medieval figures*

Name of several medieval personages.

## Arnold Amalricus

Cistercian monk, Abbot of Cîteaux (1201), inquisitor and legate (1204), Archbishop of Narbonne (1212); d. 29 September, 1225. For a bibliography of his alleged order to slay indiscriminately both Catholics and Albigenses at the siege of Béziers (1209) see Chevalier, "Repertoire" (bio-Bibl., I, 319). The accusation has been amply refuted by Ph. Tamizey de Larroque, "Revue des quest. hist." (Paris, 1866), I, 179-186.

## Arnold of Badeto

Prior of the Dominican convent of Limoux, general inquisitor at Toulouse (1531), d. 1536; author of a "Breviarium de mirabilibus mundi" (Avignon, 1499), "Destructorium haeresum" (Paris, 1532), etc.

## Arnold of Bonneval

Benedictine abbot in the diocese of Chartres (1144-56), correspondent and biographer of St. Bernard, and author of other works of a spiritual and edifying character (P.L., CLXXXIX, 1507-1760).

## Arnold of Cologne

The second master-architect of the cathedral of Cologne, successor of Meister Gerhard (1295-1301). To him and his son John are owing the upper part of the apse and the completion of the choir. The change from three to five naves is said to have been made by his advice. His strength lay in the thoroughness and precision with which he carried out the details of the great architectonic plan of the cathedral.

## Arnold of Corbie

Abbot of the Benedictine Monastery of St. Matthias near Trier (c. 1063), author of a treatise on the manner of calculating the Easter festival, made a Latin metrical version of the Book of Proverbs, and a "Cyclus Paschalis".

## Arnold of Halberstadt

(996-1023). One of the principal feudal bishops of Germany, and leader of the imperial forces against Boleslaw of Poland.

## Arnold of Harff

Born about 1400, in the Ducht of Julich, author of a pilgrim's journey (1496-99) to the holy places and the Orient (ed. Groote, 1860).

## Arnold of Lübeck (thirteenth century)

(Died 1211-14). A Benedictine abbot, author of an important "Chronica Slavorum" (1172-1209) and advocate of the papal cause in the Hohenstaufen conflict (Michael, Gesch. d. deutsch. Volkes im Mittlalter, III, 374).

## Arnold of Lübeck (fifteenth century)

Bishop of that see (1449-66), a learned canonist, zealous prelate, and peacemaker, especially (1465) between Poland and the Teutonic Order.

## Arnold of Montaneri

A Franciscan, condemned for his extreme ideas concerning the poverty of Christ and the Apostles, flourished about the middle of the fourteenth century (Wadding, Ann. Minor., VIII, 245).

## Arnold of Quedlinburg

German chronicler of the thirteenth century, d. after 1265 (Potthast, Bibl. Hist. Med. Aevi, 2d ed., I, 120).

## Arnold of Selehofen

Archbishop of Mainz (1153-60), slain by the rival municipal faction of the Meingote (Kirchenlexicon, I, 1424).

## Arnold of Tongres

(Luydius, a Lude). Canon regular, b. at Tongres; d. 1540, at Leyden; dean (1494) of the faculty of arts at Cologne, professor of theology, canon of the cathedral of Cologne, author of a commentary on Juvenal, and of a work "Contra Sacerdotes Concubinarios". He displeased the humanists by his attitude in the Reuehlin conflict, and was made the butt of Hutten's satire (Janssen, Gesch. d. deutschen Volkes., etc., I, 111, 18th ed.; II, 47, 18th ed.).

## Arnold of Villanueva

See Villanueva.

## Arnold of Vohburg

(1084), author of a life of St. Emmeram. ["Patrologia Latina," CXLI; Wattenbach, "Deutsche Geschichtsquellen" (6th ed.), I, 64 sq.].
