# The Augustinus-Verein

*An association organized in 1878 to promote the interests of the Catholic press, particularly the daily press, of Germany*

An association organized in 1878 to promote the interests of the Catholic press, particularly the daily press, of Germany. The society proposes to attain its end

- by giving its moral support to the establishment of Catholic papers;
- by furnishing trustworthy information and authentic news to the daily papers;
- by training Catholic journalists, and giving assistance to the members of the profession in need of it;
- by representing the interests of the profession;
- by securing positions and giving informatiom and assistance in all matters connected with journalism, free of charge and finally
- by endeavouring to bring about the harmonious co-operation of Catholic publishers, as well as uniformity in treating the questions of the day.

The lack of organization on the part of the

Catholic

Press first became obvious at an early stage of the

Kulturkampf

; several unsuccessful attempts were made to supply the deficiency, among others the formation of a

society

of publishers. The first feasible steps were taken at the

Catholic

Convention at

Würzburg

; at subsequent gatherings plans were matured, and at Düsseldorf, 15 May, 1878, a programme was drawn up which is substantially followed out in the present Augustinus-Verein, Düsseldorf became the centre of the Verein, which, now that it has spread throughout

Germany

, is divided into ten groups, corresponding to

geographical

divisions, each, to a large extent autonomous. A general assembly is held annually. The Verein has its own organ, the "Augustinusblatt", published at Krefeld. It also conducts a literary bureau, a beneficial

society

, a parliamentary correspondence association of the

Centre Party

, in

Berlin

, and an employment agency. In 1904 the

society

had a regular membership of 850, in addition to the associate membership.
