# Bl. Anthony Baldinucci

*Jesuit priest and missionary, preached penitence and devotion to the Virgin Mary, d. 1717*

Born 19 June, 1665, at Florence, died 6 November, 1717. He entered the Society of Jesus 21 April, 1681, and was ordained priest 28 October, 1695. After his third year of probation, he began his missionary career at Monte Santo. The field of his labors were the towns of Frascati and Viterbo, in which, with the exception of some more distant places, he labored for the rest of his life. His methods of preaching were of the most unusual and startling character. Splendid processions were organized which proceeded from various parts of the country to the place where the mission was being given. Many of the people wore crowns of thorns and scourged themselves as they went along. When Baldinucci preached he frequently carried a cross, and was loaded down with heavy chains. He often walked up and down among the people scourging himself to blood. The exercises were usually brought to a close by the burning in the public square of cards, dice, musical instruments, etc. He always carried with him a miraculous picture of the Madonna which was borne before him as he proceeded from place to place. The propaganda of devotion to the Blessed Virgin was one of his special aims. To keep order among the vast throngs who flocked to hear him, he always employed a number of laymen whom he called *deputati.* They were not infrequently men of very bad lives whom he chose purposely in order to conciliate and convert them. His work among the clergy was marked by great prudence and success. Though his preaching was incessant, he found time to write two courses of Lenten Sermons, to gather materials for many more, compose hundreds of discourses, and carry on an immense correspondence. The effect of his apostolic work upon the excitable people among whom he worked was stupendous. At times, when approaching a city, he found crowds covering the walls awaiting his arrival. His particular methods are explainable as those best adapted to his surroundings and times. After twenty years of labor, he died at the age of fifty-two. He was already canonized in public estimation, but, although the official ecclesiastical process was begun in 1753, the decree of his beatification was issued only on 23 April, 1893.

## Sources

Goldie, Life of B. Anthony Baldinucci (London, 1894); Vanucci, Vita del Beato A. Baldinucci (Rome, 1893); Galuzzi, Life of Baldinucci (Rome, 1720); Budrioli, Summarium (Florence); Bartholomew Pace, S. J. (Baldinucci's companion), Evidence, Sermon, p. 116.
