# Jean François Baltus

*Theologian, born at Metz, 8 June, 1667; died at Reims, 9 March, 1743*

Theologian, born at Metz, 8 June, 1667; died at Reims, 9 March, 1743. He entered the Society of Jesus, 21 November, 1682, taught humanities at Dijon, rhetoric at Pont-à-Mousson, Scripture, Hebrew, and theology at Strasburg, where he was also rector of the university. In 1717, he was general censor of books at Rome, and later rector of Chalon, Dijon, Metz, Pont-à-Mousson, and Châlons. He left several works of value to the Christian apologist, notably: (1) "Réponse à l'historie des oracles de M. de Fontenelle", a critical treatise on the oracles of paganism, in refutation of Van Dale's theory and in defense of the Fathers of the Church (Strasburg, 1707), followed in 1708 by "Suite de la réponse à l'historie des oracles". (2) "Défense des S. Pères accusés de platonisme" (Paris, 1711); this is a refutation of "Platonisme dévoilé" a work of the Protestant minister Souverain of Poitiers. (3) "Jugement des SS. Pères sur la morale de la philosophie païenne" (Strasburg, 1719). (4) "La religion chrétienne prouvée par l'accomplissement des prophéties de l'Ancien et du Nouveau Testament suivant la méthode des SS. Pères" (Paris, 1728). (5) "Défense des prophéties de la religion chrétienne" (Paris, 1737). To these may be added a funeral oration on the Most Rev. Peter Creagh, Archbishop of Dublin (Strasburg, 1705), "The Acts of St, Balaam, Martyr", and the "Life of St. Frebonia, Virgin and Martyr" (Dijon, 1720 and 1721 respectively).

## Sources

Sommervogel in Dict. de theol. cath., s.v.; Id., Bibl. de la c. de J., I, 856-860; VIII, 1736.
