# Lopez de Barrientos

*Spanish Dominican bishop, patriot, and diplomat (1382-1469)*

A Spanish Dominican bishop, patriot, and diplomat, b. at Medina del Campo, Kingdom of Leon 1382; d. at Cuenca, 21 May, 1469. He was of noble parentage, and after receiving a liberal education in the University of Salamanca, entered the Dominican Order, in his native town, when about eighteen years of age. After his religious profession, he was again sent to Salamanca for a course of divinity. In this he showed extraordinary talent and love for study. He soon became known as one of the greatest theologians of Spain, and was appointed to the first chair of theology in that famous university. In 1433, John II of Castile and Leon called him to his court, to be his confessor and tutor to their heir presumptive, afterwards Henry IV. Because of his ability and prudence, he was then made Grand Chancellor of State and Inquisitor General. He became successively Bishop of Segovia, 1439; of Avila, 1442; of Cuenca, 1444. Later he refused the Archbishopric of Compostella. John II, in his last will and testament, 1454, also named him tutor to Prince Alphonsus, a younger son. By his wise counsel and eminent statesmanship, he rendered his king and country conspicuous service. He also did much in the way of religious reformation and works of charity, and was a liberal patron of learning. His name frequently appears in the Spanish history of those troublous times. His writings comprise a treatise on the sacraments, a compendium of moral theology, a commentary on a part of the "Book of Decretals" (all in Latin), and several Spanish manuscripts on ecclesiastical matters and doctrinal subjects.

## Sources

Touron, *Hist. des hommes ill. De l'ordre de Saint Dominique* (Paris, 1743-49), III; Echard, *Script. Ord. Praed.* (Paris, 1719-21), I; Mariana, *Historia de rebus Hispaniae* (Toledo, 1592).
