# Henry Bedford

*Writer and educator (1816-1903)*

Writer, educator, b. in London 1 October, 1816; d. in Dublin, Ireland, 21 May, 1903. With the intention of becoming a clergyman of the Church of England, to which his family belonged, he entered Cambridge University in 1835 and after a distinguished course received the degree of M. A. He made his theological studies and after ordination was given charge of a church in London where he became noted in High Church circles as a popular writer and preacher. A very advanced "Puseyite" sermon during the Tractarian excitement brought him in conflict with the Bishop of London and led to his conversion to Catholicism in 1851. He wished to take Holy orders, but a natural defect in his right hand was a canonical obstacle to ordination. In 1852 he accepted an invitation to join the staff of All Hallows Missionary College, Drumcondra, near Dublin, Ireland, and there lived a long life of active, effective work as professor of natural science, treasurer, and one of the college directors. He also did much in furtherance of the Catholic movement then at its height in England and was a constant contributor to Catholic periodicals and a public lecturer on Catholic topics. His writings on a variety of subjects, embracing travels, archaeology, art, science, music and the general treatment of past periods of English literature were frequent features of "The Month", "The Irish Monthly", and "The Irish Ecclesiastical Record". Some of them were later reprinted for private circulation in pamphlet form, notably his "Vacation Rambles", which were issued in a series (1874-75-76-78-79) subsequent to their appearance in "The Month".

## Sources

*All Hallows Annual* (Dublin, 1906); *The Freeman's Journal* files (Dublin); *The Irish Monthly* files (Dublin).
