# Carlo Sebastiano Berardi

*Canonist (1719-1768)*

Canonist, b. at Oneglia, Italy, 26 August, 1719; d. 1768. Having studied theology at Savona under the Piarists, he was promoted to the priesthood and then began the study of law at Turin, paying particular attention to canonical jurisprudence. In 1749 he was appointed prefect of the law-faculty of the University of Turin, while from 1754 till his death he was professor of canon law in the same institution.

Berardi's works are: (1) "Gratiani canones genuini ab apocryphis discreti, corrupti ad emendatiorum codicum fidem exacti, difficiliores commodâ interpretatione illustrati" (4 vols. quarto, Turin, 1752-57; Venice, 1777, 1783). Richter (in Proleg. ad Gratiani Decretum) says of this work that one knows not whether to admire more the knowledge or diligence evidenced in it, while all unanimously declare that, as a critical exposition of Gratian's Decretum, it is surpassed by Antonio Agostino's work alone. The great value of the work lies in this, that it sets forth the original authorities of the Decretum, though carelessness is apparent at times in the author's endeavors to distinguish genuine sources from those that are spurious. Berardi, moreover, is occasionally hypercritical. A compendium of this work by an unknown writer, published at Venice, 1778, is entitled, "Compendium Commentariorum Caroli Sebastiani Berardi in Canones Gratiani." (2) "De Variis Sacrorum Canonum Collectionibus ante Gratianum", published together with his first work. (3) "Commentaria in Jus Ecclesiasticum Universum", four vols. quarto, Turin, 1766; two vols. octavo, Venice, 1778, 1789; 1847). This is an excellent treatise from the viewpoint both of theory and practice. (4) "Institutiones Juris Ecclesiastici" (2 vols. Turin, 1769), a work that is to be read with caution.

## Sources

WEURNZ, Jus Decretalium (Rome, 1898), I, n. 315, 396, 397; SCHULTE, Die Geschichte d. Quellen, III, par. 1, 524; VALLAURI, Storia delle Univeraita degli Studi del Piemonte, III, 219.
