# Pierre-Rose-Ursule-Dumoulin Borie

*Short biography of the nineteenth-century French missionary priest and martyr*

Bishop-elect of Acanthus, Vicar Apostolic of Western Tongking and Martyr; b. 20 February, 1808, at Beynat, Diocese of Tulle, France; beheaded 24 November, 1838. He studied successively at the colleges of Beaulieu and Servieres, and in 1826 entered the seminary of Tulle. Meanwhile the desire to devoted his life to the evangelization of distant lands matured, and in 1829 he proceeded to Paris and spent thirteen months at the Seminary of the Foreign Missions. Too young for the priesthood, he was to have been ordained at Pondicherry, on his way to his missionary post. However, a dispensation from Rome permitted his immediate ordination, which took place at Bayeux (1830). He sailed from Havre, 1 December, 1830, and, after spending some time at Macao, in China, arrived in Tongking in the year 1832. His progress in the language of the country was rapid, but eight months after his installation an edict of persecution was issued (January, 1833). Borie had to remain almost continually concealed and to endure great privations. In 1834, failing health increased the acuteness of the sufferings of persecution. He regained his strength the following year and was enabled to visit even the least accessible Christian communities of the vast district of which he was in charge. He fell into the hands of the persecutors in 1838. During his captivity he received the news of his nomination to the Vicariate Apostolic of Western Tongking, with Acanthus as titular see. Shortly after this, on the 24th of November, 1838, the death sentence was pronounced on him and two native priests; the execution took place that same day. His remains were brought to France in 1843, and are religiously kept at the Seminary of the Foreign Missions, in Paris. The cause of his beatification has been introduced at Rome.

## Sources

P.D.H. BORIE (brother of Mouseigneur Borie, writing anonymously), vie de Mgr. Borie, par un pretre du diocese de Tulle (Paris, 1844; 2d ed., 1846); LAUNAY, Les cinquantedeus serviteurs de Dieu (Paris, 1895), 133-162.
