# César-Egasse du Boulay

*French historian, b. in the beginning of the seventeenth century at Saint-Ellier; d. 16 October, 1678*

(BULÆUS).

A French historian, b. in the beginning of the seventeenth century at Saint-Ellier (department of Mayenne); d. 16 October, 1678. After teaching humanities in the College of Navarre he occupied important positions in the University of Paris, especially those of rector and historian of the university. His main work is the "Historia Universitatis Parisiensis" covering the period from the supposed foundation of the university by Charlemagne (800) to 1600. The first three volumes published in 1665 were censured by the university. To justify himself the author wrote the "Notæ ad censuram . . ." (Paris, 1667). The censors appointed by the king found nothing blameworthy in the work, and the last three volumes were published in 1673. Du Boulay's history is very important on account of the many original documents which it reproduces, but its value is lessened by the insufficient judgment and criticism of the author. Other writings of Du Boulay refer to the same topic of the university, its foundation, patrons, administration, and privileges; "De patronis quatuor nationum universitatis" (1662); "Carlomagnolia . . ." (1662); "De decanatu nationis Gallicanæ . . ." (1662); "Remarques sur la dignité, rang . . . du recteur" (1668); "Remarques sur l'election des officiers de l'Université" (1668); "Recueil des privileges de l'Université . . ." (1674); "Fondation de l'Université par l'empereur Charlemagne . . ." (1675). In addition to these Du Boulay wrote "Speculum eloquentiæ (1658) and "Trésor des antiquités romaines" (1651).

## Sources

FÉRET, La faculté de théologie de Paris et ses docteurs les plus célebres. Epoque moderne (Paris, 1904), III, 435; HURTER, Nomenclator (2d ed., Innsbruck, 1893), II, 241; Biographie universelle (Paris, 1811-28), V, 326; DENIFLE, Die Enistchung der Universitäten des Mittelalters bis 1400 (Berlin, 1885).
