# St. Brogan

*Article discusses several saints of this name*

Flourished in the sixth or seventh century. Several persons in repute for holiness seem to have borne this name, which is variously written *Brogan, Broccan, Bracan,*and even *Bearchan* and *Bearchanus.* Of these, two are commemorated in the Irish Martyrologium of Aengus, the early date of which (c. 800) is now generally admitted. There, under 8 July, we read: "Brocan, the scribe, gained a noble triumph without any fall"; and under 17 September: "Brocan of Ross Tuirc thou shouldst declare". Colgan (*Trias Thaumat.,* p. 518) speaks as if he were inclined to identify both these persons with the author of an early Irish hymn upon St. Brigid. The glosses upon Aengus and the Martyrology of Gorman, while seemingly treating them as distinct, prove that the matter admits of no certainty. Some modern hagiographers incline to regard the St. Brogan of 8 July as the amanuensis and possibly the nephew of St. Patrick. They style him bishop and locate him at Maethail-Brogain, now Mothil in Waterford; but this is admittedly quite doubtful. St. Brogan of Rosstuirc, on the other hand, is identified with the author of the hymn to St. Brigid, and is believed to be the Abbot Brochanus referred to in the Life of St. Abban, preserved in the "Codex Salmanticensis". Rosstuirc is generally assigned to the Diocese of Ossory, and may be Rossmore in Queen's County.

Other Brochans are mentioned in the Martyrology of Gorman under 1 January, 9 April, 27 June, and 25 August.

## Sources

O'HANLON, *Lives of the Irish Saints*(Dublin, 1892-1902), July Vol., 170; September Vol., 435-440; *Acta SS.* 17 September, Vol. V; CARRIGAN, *History of the Diocese of Ossory*(Dublin, 1905), II, 28 and 175; III, 334 and 441; IV, 174; ARCHDALL, *Monasticon Hibernicum;*FORBES in *Dict. Christ. Biog.,*I, 339; cf. 314; DE SMEDT, *Acta Sanctorum Hibern. ex Codice Salmanticensi,* 505-540.
