# David-Augustine de Brueys

*French theologian and dramatic author, born at Aix in 1640; died 25 November, 1723, at Montpellier*

A French theologian and dramatic author, born at Aix in 1640; died 25 November, 1723, at Montpellier. His family was Protestant, and he was brought up a Calvinist. After devoting some time to the study of law, he applied himself to theology with so much success that he was made a member of the consistory of Montpellier. In 1691, he published an answer to Bossuet's "Exposition of Catholic Doctrine", entitled "Réponse au livre de M. de Condom intitute Exposition de la doctrine catholique" (Geneva, 1681). He was soon, however, converted by Bossuet himself, abjured Protestantism in 1682, and, after his wife's death, became a priest. Before his conversion he wrote, besides the "Réponse", the "Suite du Preservatif (de Jurieu) contre le changement de religion" (1682).

His principal works, written after his conversion, are: "Examen des raisons qui ont donné lieu à la séparation des protestants" (Paris, 1683), in which he explains the reasons of his conversion; "Traité de la sainte messe" (Paris, 1683); "Défense du culte extérieur de l'Église catholique" (Paris, 1686); "Response aux plaintes des protestants contre les moyens que l'on emploie en France pour les réunir à l'Église" (Paris, 1686); "Traité de l'Église" (Paris, 1686); "Traité de l'Eucharistie" (Paris, 1686); "Histoire du fanaticisme de notre temps" (I, 1692; II, 1709; III and IV, 1713); "Traité de l'obéissance des chrétiens aux puissances temporelles" (Paris, 1710); "Traité du légitime usage de la raison principalement sur les objets de la foi" (Paris, 1717).

In collaboration with Palaprat, Brueys also wrote several comic plays and a few tragedies, most of which were produced with great success. They were published in two volumes in 1712, under the title of "OEvres dramatiques". A new edition to three volumes appeared in 1755, with the author's life by De Launay; again in 1755 (5 vols.), under the title of "OEuvres de Brueys et Palaprat"; and finally in 1812 (2 vols.) as "Œuvres choisies".
