# Giuseppe Catalani

*A Roman liturgist of the eighteenth century, member of the Oratory of San Girolamo della Carita (Hieronymite), famous for his correct editions of the chief liturgical books of the Roman Church, which are still in habitual use, and which he enriched with scholarly commentaries illustrative of the history, rubrics, and canon law of the Roman Liturgy*

(CATALANO, CATALANUS).

A Roman liturgist of the eighteenth century, member of the Oratory of San Girolamo della Carita (Hieronymite), famous for his correct editions of the chief liturgical books of the Roman Church, which are still in habitual use, and which he enriched with scholarly commentaries illustrative of the history, rubrics, and canon law of the Roman Liturgy. Among these are the "Pontificale Romanum" (3 vols. in fol., Rome, 1738-40, reprinted at Paris, 1850; re-edited by Muhlbauer, Augsburg, 1878), with a learned introduction and notes, and based on the best manuscripts; "Caeremoniale episcoporum" (2 vols., in fol., Rome, 1747, with copperplate engravings; reprinted at Paris, 1860); "Sacrarum Caeremoniaryum sive rituum ecclesiasticorum S. R. ecclesiae libri tres" etc. (1 vol. in fol., Rome, 1750-51); "Rituale Romanum Benedicti XIV jussu editum et auctum" etc. (Rome, 1757, 2 vols. in fol.). Catalani is also the author of works on the history, series, duties, and privileges of two important curial offices: "De Magistro Sacri Palatii libri duo" (Rome, 1751) and "De Secretario S. Congreg. Indicis libri duo" (Rome, 1751). We owe him also annoted editions of two works much used for the spiritual formation of the Catholic clergy: the letter of St. Jerome "ad Nepotianum suum" (Rome, 1740) and St. John Chrysostom's work on the priesthood (De Sacerdotio, Rome, 1740). His (rare) historical treatise on the reading of the Gospels at Mass, its origin, ancient usages, etc. ("De codice Evangelii", Rome, 1733; see "Acta erudit. Lips.", 1735, 497-99) is yet highly appreciated by all liturgists. He belongs also among the best historians of the ecumenical councils by reason of his edition of their decrees, which Father Hurter calls a very learned (*plane docta*) work. "Sacrosancta concilia oecumenica commentariis illustrata" (Rome, 1736-49). Finally, he offers no slight interest to the ecclesiastical scholars of the New World because of his new edition (Rome, 1753, 6 vols. in fol.) of Cardinal d'Aguirre's "Collectio maxima conciliorum Hispaniae et Novi Orbis", i.e. Mexico and South America (first published at Rome, in 1693).
