# Cæsar Clement

*Date of birth uncertain; died at Brussels 28 Aug., 1626, great-nephew of Sir Thomas More's friend, Dr. John Clement*

Date of birth uncertain; died at Brussels 28 Aug., 1626, great-nephew of Sir Thomas More's friend, Dr. John Clement. He was a student at Douai when in 1578 the college was removed to Reims, but was shortly sent to the English College, Rome, being admitted 5th September, 1579. He was ordained priest in 1585, but remained in Rome till Oct., 1587. He took the degree of Doctor of Theology in Italy, probably in Rome itself. Though originally destined for the English mission, he never went to England. but held the important positions of Dean of St. Gudule's, Brussels, and vicar-general of the King of Spain's army in Flanders. He was a great benefactor to all English exiles, especially the Augustinian Canonesses of Louvain. In 1612 he, with the Rev. Robert Chambers, was commissioned from Rome to make a visitation of Douai College so as to put an end to the dissatisfaction with the administration there. (See Dodd, "Church Hist. of Eng.", Tierney ed., V, 3 sqq.)

## Sources

DODD, *Church History of England* (London, 1737), II, 388; MORRIS, *Troubles of our Cath. Forefathers* (London, 1872), I, 40, 41, 47, 57; *Douay Diaries* (London. 1877); FOLEY, *Records Eng. Prov. S. J.* (London. 1880), VI, 138; GILLOW, *Bibl. Dict. Eng. Cath.* (London, 1885), I, 497-8; COOPER in *Dict. Nat. Biog.* (London, 1887). XI, 32; HAMILTON, *Chronicles of the English Augustinian Canonesses of Louvain* (London, 1904-6).
