# Commissariat of the Holy Land

*In the Order of Friars Minor the territory or district assigned to a commissary, whose duty it is to collect alms for the maintenance of the Holy Places in Palestine committed to the care of the Friars Minor; also, in a more restricted sense, the convent where the aforesaid commissary resides*

In the Order of Friars Minor the territory or district assigned to a commissary, whose duty it is to collect alms for the maintenance of the Holy Places in Palestine committed to the care of the Friars Minor; also, in a more restricted sense, the convent where the aforesaid commissary resides. The commissary, who is always a member of the order, receives his appointment by letters patent from the minister general, to whom he is bound to transmit every year a detailed account of the alms received. These aims may not, under any circumstances, without express permission of the Holy See, be applied to other purposes, however pious and meritorious, under grave ecclesiastical penalties. The alms taken up by the bishops at the annual collections for the Holy Land are conveyed to the custos in Jerusalem through the commissary in whose district the dioceses of the bishops are situated. There are at present forty commissariats throughout the Christian world. The most ancient is that of Naples, founded in 1333, when Robert of Anjou redeemed the Holy Places from the Sultan of Egypt. In English-speaking countries there are seven — three in the united States, one in Canada, one in Great Britain, one in Ireland, and one in Australia. The Commissariat of the United States was founded in 1882, and the commissary resides in the new convent of Mount St. Sepulchre, Washington, D.C. In 1902, commissariats were erected in California and at St. Louis.

## Sources

*Conspectus Omnium Missionum Ord. FF. Minorum exhibitus Capitulo Gererali Romæ habito die 30 Maii, 1903* (Rome, 1903); *Regula et Constitutiones Generales Fratr. Minorum* (Rome, 1897); several Bulls and Briefs issued at different periods by the Holy See, of which the following are the principal SIXTUS V, *Nostri pastoralis* (13 Dec., 1589); PAUL V. *Cælestis Regis* (22 Jan., 1618); URBAN VIII, *Alias a felicis* (18 June, 1634) in *Bull. Rom.,* XV, 320 sqq.; BENEDICT XIV, *Emanarunt nuper* (20 Aug., 1743) in *Bullar. Benedict. XIV* (Prato, 1845), I, 313; Pius VI, *Inter cætera* (31 July, 1778) in *Bull. Rom. Cont.* (Turin), VI, pt. I 505; LEO XIII, *Salvatoris* (26 Dec., 1887). See also *S. C. S. Officii* (28 June, 1876); *S. C. Prop. Fide* (20 Feb., 1891) in *Collectanea S. C. Prop.,* n. 1632, 1638.
