# Bl. Conrad of Ascoli

*Italian-born Franciscan missionary to Africa, d. 1289*

Friar Minor

and missionary, b. at

Ascoli

in the

March of Ancona

in 1234; d. there, 19 April, 1289. He belonged to the noble

family

of Milliano and from his earliest years made penance the predominating element of his life. He entered the

Order of Friars Minor

at

Ascoli

together with his townsman and lifelong friend, Girolamo d'Ascoli, afterwards minister general, and later

pope

under the title of

Nicholas IV

. Having completed his studies at

Perugia

, Conrad was sent to

Rome

to teach

theology

. Later he obtained permission to go to

Africa

, where he preached with much fruit through the different provinces of Libya and worked numerous

miracles

. He was recalled from

Africa

to go on a mission to the King of

France

, then at

war

with

Spain

, and subsequently he became

lector

of

theology

at

Paris

. When not engaged in teaching, Conrad preached to the people or ministered to the sick in

hospitals

. In 1288 he was summoned to

Rome

by the new

pope

,

Nicholas IV

, who wished to make him

cardinal

, but Conrad died on the way after reaching his native city, being then fifty-five years of age.

Nicholas IV

was deeply grieved at the loss of his

saintly

friend, on whose counsel and

zeal

he had counted so much, and declared that Conrad's death was a great loss to the

Church

. The people of

Ascoli

erected a splendid

tomb

over the remains of Blessed Conrad. In 1371, when his body was removed to the new church of the

Franciscans

, it was found incorrupt and gave forth a sweet odour.

Pius VI

approved the cultus of Blessed Conrad. His

feast

is kept in the

Order of Friars Minor

on 19 April.
