# Giovanni Domenico Costadoni

*Frequently known as Dom Anselmo, his name in religion, an Italian Camaldolese monk, historian, and theologian, b. 6 October, 1714, at Venice; d.23 January, 1785, in the same city*

Frequently known as Dom Anselmo, his name in religion, an Italian Camaldolese monk, historian, and theologian, b. 6 October, 1714, at Venice; d. 23 January, 1785, in the same city. The son of a rich merchant, he sacrificed at an early date his prospects of success in the world and took the religious habit at St. Michael's monastery, situated on the island of Murano in the Venetian lagoon. Here he studied philosophy and theology with more than usual success. At the age of twenty-three he revealed his literary ability in a letter (Lettera critica) written in defense of certain Camaldolese writers, who had been attacked by Giusto Fontanini in his "Library of Italian Eloquence". Costadoni subsequently collaborated for eighteen years with the learned Mittarelli in the publication of the "Annales Camaldulenses" (Venice, 1755-73). Some archæological papers due to his pen, such as "Dissertazione sopra il pesce come simbolo degli antichi cristiani", were published in the voluminous collection of historical essays edited by Calogerà, a monk of the same order. His works also include: "Avvisi ed istruzioni pratiche intorno ai principali doveri de' regolari" (Faenza, 1770; Venice, 1771); "Lettere consolatorie" (Venice, 1775); "Lettere sopra questione teologiche" (Venice, 1773). Costadoni's unpublished manuscripts were transferred, after his death, to St. Gregory's monastery at Rome, by order of the Camaldolese abbot, Mauro Cappellari (later Pope Gregory XVI).

## Sources

MANDELLI, *Della vita e degli scritti di A. Costadoni* (Venice, 1787); PICOT, *Mémoires* (Paris, 1855), V, 470; HURTER, *Nomenclator*, III, 376.
