# Joseph Creswell

*Controversialist, b. 1577 of Yorkshire stock in London; d. about 1623*

(*vere* Arthur)

Controversialist, b. 1557 of Yorkshire stock in London; d. about 1623. His widowed mother married William Lacey, who, after her death, was ordained priest and martyred (22 August, 1582) at York. Creswell joined the Society of Jesus at Rome, 11 Oct., 1583, having previously studied at Reims and at the Roman College. Having been rector (1589-1592) after Father Persons at the English College, Rome, he also succeeded Persons as vice-prefect for the English Jesuit interests in Spain. Creswell's character and conduct in connection with his difficulties over the seminaries in Seville and Valladolid, and his controversies about the Benedictine vocations have been severely criticized (Cf. Camm, Life of Ven. John Roberts, and Polen, The Month, London, Sept.-Oct., 1899). Father Creswell had considerable intercourse with Sir Charles Cornwallis, the English resident at Madrid, till the Powder Plot, when Creswell was summoned to Rome. Sent to Belgium in 1614, he was at St-Omer in 1620, and in 1621 was made rector of Ghent. His chief works are:- A Latin treatise, "De Vitâ Beatâ";- "Exemplar Literarun ad Cecilium (sive Burleigh)", 1592, under the pseudonym "John Perne", against Elizabeth's proclamation of 29 Nov., 1591; - "Vida y Martyrio del P. Henrique Valpolo" (Madrid, 1596); - treatise against James First's (1610) proclamation (4to, St-Omer, 1611);- "Meditations upon the Rosary" (St-Omer, 1620);- translation into Spanish, under the name "Peter Manrique" of Father William Bathe's "Preparation for Administering Penance and the Eucharist" (Milan, 1614); - translation into English and Spanish, under initials N. T. of Salvian's "Quis dives salvus?" (St-Omer, 1618); "Relacionde Inglaterra", Ms X, 14, National Library, Madrid;- memoir for Philip III of Spain on affairs of the Society; - "Responsio at Calumnias." Stonyhurst Library, Letters, Vatican archives (Lettere di particolari, I, 1).

## Sources

Foley, Records, VI and VII; Oliver, Collectanea S. J.; Douay diaries, p. xclx; Butler, memoirs, II, 224; Sommervogel, Bibliothèque, II, 1656; Cooper in Dict. Nat. Biog., XIII, 73.
