# John Dalton

*Irish author and translator from Spanish and German, born in 1814; died at Maddermarket, Norwich, 15 February, 1874*

Irish author and translator from Spanish and German, born in 1814; died at Maddermarket, Norwich, 15 February, 1874. He spent his early years at Coventry, England, and was educated at Sedgley Park School. He then proceeded to Oscott College, where he was ordained priest in 1837. After serving some time on the mission at Northampton (where he established large schools), he laboured at Norwich for three years, and subsequently built a handsome church at Lynn. During his residence in Lynn he published his best-known book, an English translation of "The Life of St. Teresa, written by herself", showing a perfect mastery of the Spanish language. Father Dalton made an exhaustive study of the life and works of St. Teresa, and caused her writings to become generally known to English readers. On the erection of the Diocese of Northampton, in 1854, he was made a member of the chapter, and lived many years at Bishop's House in that city. In order to acquire a first-hand acquaintance with the Spanish literature pertaining to the life of the foundress of the Discalced Carmelites, he spent nine months during the years 1858-59 at the English College, Valladolid. On his return to England he settled at St. John's, Maddermarket, Norwich, where he ended his days. Canon Dalton is described by contemporary writers as most amiable, zealous, and charitable, and a favourite with all creeds and classes. Among his numerous works translated from the Spanish are the following: "Life of St. Teresa" (London, 1851); "The Interior Castle, or the Mansions" (London, 1852); "The Letters of St. Teresa" (London, 1853); "The Book of the Foundations" (London, 1853), etc. He also published translations from Latin and German, including "The Life of Cardinal Ximenes" from the German of Bishop Von Hefele (London, 1860).
