# Jean Dardel

*Friar Minor of the French province of the order, chronicler of Armenia in the fourteenth century, adviser and confessor to King Leo V (or VI) of Armenia*

Friar Minor

of the French province of the order, chronicler of

Armenia

in the fourteenth century, adviser and confessor to King Leo V (or VI) of

Armenia

. Nothing is known regarding him except what he himself tells us in his "Chronique d'Arménie", a work unknown until recent times. Dardel was born at Estampes, and became a

Franciscan

about the middle of the fourteenth century. Not earlier than 1375 he went with other

pilgrims

to Jerusalem and

Mount Sinai

. Arriving at Cairo he found the unhappy Leo, last King of

Armenia

(Cilicia), who after a nine-months siege in the fortress of Gaban was made

prisoner

by the Emir of

Aleppo

and brought to Jerusalem: and from there sent, together with his

family

, to Cairo (July, 1375). In Cairo Dardel accepted the invitation of the

imprisoned

monarch to act as his adviser, confessor, and secretary. With Dardel was a companion named Brother Anthony da Monopoli. Dardel saw the king frequently and said

Mass

before him, a privilege easily obtained from the sultan. He remained at Cairo till 1379, and, as he tells us, wrote some of the letters which the king sent to

Europe

seeking to procure his freedom. Eventually King Leo entrusted him with his royal seal and letters of credence, and sent him as ambassador to King Peter IV of

Aragon

, and, failing success with him, to all the other kings of

Christendom

to obtain his freedom. Dardel and his companion, Brother Anthony, set out from Cairo II Sept., 1379, and reached Barcelona, 1 March, 1380. After travelling over half of

Europe

he barely succeeded in inducing the King of

Aragon

to send an embassy with gifts to the sultan. Under the leadership of the pilgrim Gian-Alfonso di Loric, with some support from John I, King of Castile, the release of King Leo was thus secured, and he arrived at

Venice

, 12 December, 1382. He set out for

France

, paid homage there to

Clement VII

(the

antipope

), and then went on to

Spain

where the King of Castile received him royally.

Clement VII appointed Dardel Bishop of Tortiboli in the Kingdom of Naples, 11 April, 1383, as a reward for his labours on behalf of the Armenian king. He has left us an important "Chronique d'Arménie", hitherto unknown to Orientalists. It was discovered by Canon Ulysse Robert, who came across the manuscript in the Library of Dôle in France, and it has recently been published by the Institut des belles lettres of France in the second tome of the "Recueil des Historiens des Croisades".

## Sources

Original text in *Recueil des Historiens des Croisades: Documents Arméniens* (Paris, 1906), II, 274-1038; Armenian version by G. ERGEANTZ, *Jowhannu Dardeli Zhamanakagruthiun Hajoz* (St. Petersburg, 1891); ROBERT, *La Chronique d'Arménie de Jean Dardel, evêque de Tortoboli* in *Archives de l'Orient Latin* (1884), II, 1-15; TEZA, *Leone VI e frate Giovanni* in *Atti del R. Instituto Veneto di scienze*, LXVI, ser. VIII, vol. IX, pt. II, 322-328; MAYER in *Romania* (July, 1907), 450-455.
