# Ludwig Engel

*Canonist, b. at Castle Wagrein, Austria; d. at Grillenberg, 22 April 1694*

Canonist, b. at Castle Wagrein, Austria; d. at Grillenberg, 22 April 1694. He became a Benedictine in the monastery of Molk (Melk), 10 September, 1654, and, at the order of his abbot, applied himself to the study of law at the University of Salzburg, where theological studies were committed to the care of the Benedictines. He was proclaimed doctor of civil and canon law in 1657, ordained priest in the following year, and was soon professor of canon law at this university. His profound knowledge and personal qualities procured for him the most honourable functions. In 1669 he was unanimously chosen vice-chancellor of the university. He left Salzburg in 1674 at the invitation of the Abbot of Molk, who was desirous that Engel should be known and appreciated by the religious of this monastery, in order to be chosen as his successor. The death of Engel, which occurred in the same year, prevented this plan from being realized. His principal works are: "Manuale parochorum" (Salzburg, 1661); "Forum competens" (Salzburg, 1663); "Tractatus de privilegiis et juribus monasteriorum" (Salzburg, 1664); and especially his "Collegium universi juris canonici", etc. (Salzburg, 1671-1674), a work remarkable for its conciseness, clearness, and solidity. It has placed its author in the first rank among Benedictine canonists. The fifteenth edition appeared in 1770. A compendium or summary of this work was published in 1720 by Mainardus Schwartz.

## Sources

ZIELGELBAUER, Historia litteraria ordinis Sancti Benedicti (Augsburg, 1754), III, 401, IV, 231, 238, 593; SCHULTE, Geschichte der Quellen und Literatur des canonischen Rechts (Stuttgart, 1875-80), III, 150; EBERL in Kirchenlex, s.v.; KEIBLINGER, Gesch. Von Melk (1867), I, 899.
