# Henri Faraud

*Canadian bishop (1823-1890)*

Titular Bishop of Anémour and first Vicar Apostolic of Athabasca-Mackenzie, Canada; b. 17 March, 1823, at Gigondas, France; d. at St. Boniface, Manitoba, 26 September, 1890. After admission to the juniorate of the Oblates of Mary Immaculate, and while still in minor orders, he was sent to the missions of Northern America, and ordained priest, 8 May, 1847, at St. Boniface, Manitoba. Then he replaced Father (afterwards Bishop) Laflèche at Ile-à-la-Crosse, and in 1849 he proceeded further North, establishing the mission of Lake Athabasca, which he inaugurated 8 September, 1851. The following year, he visited Great Slave Lake, where no missions had ever been, and ministered to the Indians of Peace River (1858-59). On the 13th of May, 1862, he was made titulary of the newly created Vicariate Apostolic of Athabasca-Mackenzie; but such was his isolation from the civilized world, that he did not know of it before July of the following year.

Mgr. Guilbert, of Tours, consecrated him Bishop of Anemour, 30 Nov., 1864, a title he bore for twenty-five years, during which he evidenced considerable administrative abilities, founding missionary posts as far as the Frozen Ocean, on the one side, and the Peace and Liard Rivers, on the other. In 1835 he repaired to France, for the General Chapter of his Congregation. In 1889 he was one of the Fathers of the Provincial Council of St. Boniface, at the termination of which his growing infirmities prevented him from returning to his distant missions in the North.

## Sources

Le Manitoba (2 October, 1890), files; FERNAND MICHEL, Dixhuit ans chez les Sauvages (Paris, 1866).
