# Galtelli-Nuoro

*Diocese in the province of Sassari (Sardinia), suffragan of Caglari*

(Galtellinensis-Norensis)

Diocese in the province of Sassari (Sardinia), on a hill of the same name, suffragan of Caglari. In the neighbourhood there are quarries of red jasper. The ancient cathedral contains some good paintings. Nuoro, the Nora of the ancients, is a sub-prefecture of the same province, and stands about 2000 feet above sea-level. Near it are seen large quarries of granite and argentiferous lead, and a curious irregular ruin, apparently of early Roman origin. In the vicinity are twenty-four of the so-called *Nuraghi* (known locally as the Giants' Tombs), huge stone buildings in the shape of truncated cones. These belong to the neolithic age, and were a source of wonder even to the ancients. Here also are the *Virghenes* of Domos de Janas, a series of intercommunicating rooms excavated out of the granite rock. Galtelli was an episcopal see in 1138, when Innocent II made it a suffragan of Pisa; later, it was directly subject to the Holy See. In 1495, it was suppressed by Alexander VI, and its territory united to Cagliari. In 1787, at the request of King Victor Emmanuel III, it was re-established, but the bishop continued to live at Nuoro. Among its bishops of note was Fra Arnolfo de Bissalis (1366), renowned for his learning and eloquence. In the diocese are 25 parishes, 56,300 Catholics 1 Franciscan monastery, 2 nunneries, 1 boys' boarding-school, and 3 girls' schools.

## Sources

Cappelletti, Le Chiese d' Italia (1857), XIII, 95-99; Spano, Memorie sopra l'antica cattedrale di Galtelli (Cagliari, 1873); Martin, Storia eccl. della Sardegna (1841), III, 325-27, 85-88.
