# Generation

*Definitions include: a definite period of time, with a special reference to the average length of man's life; an indefinite period of time, of time past; the men who lived in the same period of time who were contemporaries; a race or class of men; and a dwelling place or habitation*

(Latin Vulgate, *generatio*).

This word, of very varied meaning, corresponds to the two Hebrew terms: *dôr, tôledôth*. As a rendering of the later, the Vulgate plural form, *generationes*, is treated in the article GENEALOGY. As a rendering of the former, the word *generation* is used in the following principal senses.

- It designates a definite period of time, with a special reference to the average length of man's life. It is in this sense, for example, that, during the long-lived patriarchal age, a "generation" is rated as a period of 100 years (Genesis 15:16, compared with Genesis 15:13, and Exodus 12:40), and that, at a later date, it is represented as of only 30 to 40 years.
- The word *generation* is used to mean an indefinite period of time: of time *past*, as in Deuteronomy 32:7, where we read: "Remember the days of old, think upon every generation", and in Isaiah 58:12, etc.; of time *future*, as in Psalm 44:18, etc.
- In a concrete sense, *generation* designates the men who lived in the same period of time, who were contemporaries, as for instance in Genesis 6:9: "Noah was a just and perfect man in his generations"; see also: Numbers 32:13; Deuteronomy 1:35; Matthew 24:34; etc.
- Independently of the idea of time, *generation* is employed to mean a race or class of men as characterized by the same recurring condition or quality. In this sense, the Bible speaks of a "just generation", literally "generation of the just" [Psalm 13:6; etc.], a "perverse generation", equivalent to: "generation of the wicked" [Deuteronomy 32:5; Mark 9:18; etc.].
- Lastly, in Isaiah 38:12, the word *generation* is used to designate a dwelling place or habitation, probably from the circular for of the nomad tent. Whence it can be readily seen that, in its various principal acceptations, the word *generation* (usually in the Septuagint and in the Greek New Testament: *genea*) preserves something of the primitive meaning of "circuit", "period", conveyed by the Hebrew term *dôr.*

## Sources

GESENIUS, Thesaurus (Leipzig, 1829); FURST, Hebrew and Chaldee Lexicon (Leipzig, 1867); BROWN, DRIVER AND BRIGGS, Hebrew and English Lexicon (New York, 1906).
