# Sisters of the Good Samaritan

*A congregation of Tertiaries Regular of St. Benedict, established 2 February, 1857, at Sydney, Australia*

A congregation of Tertiaries Regular of St. Benedict, established 2 February, 1857, at Sydney, Australia. In 1859 a second community was established at Windsor, and thereafter frequent foundations were made, so that now in the Archdiocese of Sydney alone there are 21 houses, with 202 members, and all Australia 29 communities and 268 members. In the Archdiocese of Sydney the sisters conduct 14 superior schools, with an attendance of about 700. In the Archdiocese of Adelaide they founded a convent at Gawler in 1902, and in the Archdiocese of Melbourne a house at Northcote (1904) and a high school at South Yarra. In the Diocese of Port Augusta, where they established a house in 1890, they have charge of a boarding school and a day school; in the Diocese of Rockhampton also they have a boarding school, founded in 1890; and in the Vicariate Apostolic of Cooktown a day school, established in 1903. At Tempe, Arncliffe, in the Archdiocese of Sydney, the Sisters of the Good Samaritan have established St. Magdalen's Retreat, a home for penitent women of all creeds. It is supported entirely by voluntary contributions and the labour of the inmates, who number (1909) about 130, and are encouraged to remain at least two years in the institution.

## Sources

*Australasian Catholic Directory* (1909); Heimbucher, *Orden und Kongregationen* (Paderborn, 1907).
