# Robert Henryson

*Scottish poet, born probably 1420-1430; died about 1500*

Scottish poet, born probably 1420-1430; died about 1500.

His birthplace, parentage, and place of education are unknown, but it is conjectured that he may have been at some foreign university — perhaps Paris or Louvain.

Little, also, is known of his later life. The earliest extant edition of his *Fables* (1570) described him on its title-page as "Scholemaister of Dunfermeling". It is probable that he was a master at the Benedictine school of the Abbey of Dunfermline, was in minor orders, and a notary public of that town. In 1462 he seems to have been admitted as a member of the newly-founded University of Glasgow.

The order or the date of composition of his poems is not known. As a poet he belongs to the group of Northern or Scottish Chaucerians, who, at a time when poetry in England was at a very low ebb, were practising the art of verse in a way worthy of the followers of Chaucer. Amongst these poets Henryson stands out as especially original — perhaps the most truly Chaucerian of them all.

His work shows much variety and consists of two rather long poems, the *Testament of Cresseid*, and *Orpheus and Eurydice*, of a collection of *Morall Fabillis of Esope*, with a prologue attached - and of a number of miscellaneous shorter poems, of which the pastoral dialogue of *Robene and Makyne* is the best known.

All these poems are remarkable, and sometimes of high poetic power. The *Testament of Cresseid*, in the well-known rhyme-royal seven line stanza, is a not unworthy tragic sequel to Chaucer's *Troylus*. The thirteen pastoral *Fables*, also in rhyme-royal, are told with great freshness, humour, and directness, and the moral of each does not lose by being kept artistically separate from the story. The pastoral *Robene and Makyne* is, however, generally ranked as his most artistic achievement. Henryson, like all the Scottish Chaucerians, was a true lover of nature, which he describes carefully and vividly.

His *Fables* were re-edited by Gregory Smith, for the Scottish Text Society, in 1906.
