# Ven. Richard Hill

*A Yorkshireman and priest, executed in 1590. Martyred together with John Hogg, Richard Holiday, and Edmund Duke*

English Martyr, executed at Durham, 27 May, 1590. Very little is known of him and his fellow-martrys, John Hogg and Richard Holiday, except that they were Yorkshiremen who arrived at the English College at Reims, Holiday on 6 September, 1584, Hill on 15 May, 1587, and Hogg on 15 October, 1587; that all three were ordained subdeacons at Soissons, 18 March, 1859, by Monsignor Jerome Hennequin, deacons 27 May and priests 23 September at Laon by Monsignor Valentine Douglas, O.S.B.; that they with their fellow martyr Edmund Duke were sent on the English mission on the following 22 March and were arrested in the north of England soon after landing; that they were arraigned, condemned, and executed at Durham under the statute 27 Eliz c. 2. With them suffered four felons who protested that they died in the same faith.

> Divers beholders, when these
>
> martyrs
>
> were offered their pardons if they would go to church, said boldly that they would rather die themselves than any of them should relent, one saying (he had seven children) "I would to
>
> God
>
> they might all go the same way in making such confession" . . . When their heads were cut off and holden up, as the manner is, not one would say "God save the Queen" except the catch-polls themselves and a minister or two.

Two Protestant spectators, Robert Maire and his wife Grace, were converted. The place at which they were executed was called Dryburn, and afterwards the legend sprung up that it was so called because the well out of which the water was drawn to boil their quarters suddenly dried up. The place however had this name before their deaths.

## Sources

Morris, The Troubles of Our Catholic Forefathers (London, 1872-7), III, 40; Mackenzie and Ross, Durham (Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1834), II, 400; Gillow, Bibl. Dict. Eng. Cath., II, 142; III, 309, 323; Knox, Records Engl. Cath. (London, 1878), I, passim; Register of St. Oswald's, Durham (Durham, 1891), 34.
