# Sir Patrick Alfred Jennings

*An Australian statesman, b. at Newry, Ireland, 1831; d. July, 1897*

An Australian statesman, b. at Newry, Ireland, 1831; d. July, 1897. He received his education, which included a training in engineering and surveying, in his native town, went to Victoria in 1852, and settled in the St. Arnaud district, where he filled various public offices. In 1863 he went to New South Wales, and engaged in pastoral pursuits in the Riverina district. Four years later he was appointed to the Legislative Council of New South Wales from which he resigned in 1869 and stood as a candidate for the Legislative Assembly, to which he was elected. In 1874 he was honoured by Pius IX with the Order of St. Gregory the Great, and in 1876 was made a Knight Commander of the Order of Pius IX and St. Gregory the Great. In 1876 he represented New South Wales and other states at the Philadelphia Exhibition. He was created C.M.G. in 1879, and in the following year K.C.M.G. For a few months in 1883 he was Vice-President of the Executive Council and colonial treasurer for a short period in 1885. In the following February Sir Patrick became premier and colonial treasurer, but resigned these offices in 1887. On revisiting Ireland in 1887 he was made an honorary LL.D. of Dublin University. In the same year he went to Rome, and received the Grand Cross of Pius IX from Leo XIII. He was called to the Legislative Council in 1890, was a member of the Senate of Sydney University a Fellow of St. John's (Catholic) College, and trustee of the Sydney Art Gallery. From 1891 until his death he led a somewhat retired life, but took a keen interest in benevolent and social movements.

## Sources

HEATON, Australion Dictionary of Dates (Sydney, 1879); MENNELL, Dictionary of Australasian Biography (London, 1892); Men of the Time (13th ed., London, 1891).
