# Joliette

*Diocese created by Pius X, 27 January, 1904 by division of the Archdiocese of Montreal; comprises three counties, Joliette, Berthier, and Montcalm, with four parishes of L'Assomption County*

(JOLIETTENSIS).

Diocese created by Pius X, 27 January, 1904 by division of the Archdiocese of Montreal; comprises three counties, Joliette, Berthier, and Montcalm, with four parishes of L'Assomption County. It forms a rectangle 105 miles long by about 45 wide.

## Religious organization

The total population is 63,500 souls, of whom 1200 are non-Catholics. This population is divided into thirty-eight canonically erected parishes and four with resident priests. According to its need each parish has one or another of the following associations or confraternities: the Third Order of St. Francis; the League of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, for men and children; the Congregation of the Most Blessed Virgin, for men, youths and young women; the Confraternities of Mount Carmel; Of the Holy Rosary; of the Bona Mors; of the Holy Angels; the Association for Daily Adoration of the Most Blessed Sacrament; the Association of the Way of the Cross; the Society of St. Vincent de Paul; and the Temperance Society. The last-named, established in each parish, gives good results. Frequent communion is observed in the diocese, and the faithful generally acquit themselves well of their religious duties. There are four vicariates-forane. Ecclesiastical conferences are held twice yearly in each vicariate. The bishop is assisted by a chapter composed of eight titular canons, a vicar-general, and archdeacon for parochial affairs, a procurator for the administration of episcopal revenue, an assistant procurator for diocesan works, and a chancellor for matrimonial affairs and the duties of a secretary. There are 115 priests in the diocese, 104 of whom are secular and 11 religious. The religious in all number 134 men and 390 women. The religious institutions of men are those of the Clerics of St. Viateur (novitiate at Joliette), Brothers of the Sacred Heart, Brothers of Christian Instruction, and Brothers of St. Gabriel. The nuns are Sisters of Charity of Providence, Sisters of the Congregation of Notre-Dame, Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary, Sisters of St. Anne, Sisters of the Holy Cross and of the Seven, Dolours, Sisters of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary, and Sisters Adorers of the Precious Blood.

## Educational institutions

The diocese contains 1 seminary, 3 commercial colleges, 3 commercial academies, 21 boarding-schools for young women, 5 academies, 25 model schools, and 230 elementary schools. There are in these 288 institutions 600 professors, 11 of whom are priests, 9 seminarians, 75 religious, 225 nuns, and 280 lay persons; 15,108 pupils receive instruction in the various institutions, 6067 being under the direction of religious men and women, and 9041 under that of lay teachers. The communities of men and women in the diocese which are charged with education are those mentioned above, with the exception of the Sisters Adorers of the Precious Blood, who lead a contemplative life.

## Charitable institutions

In the diocese there are: 1 hospital, 5 homes for the aged, 5 orphanages for girls, 1 orphanage for boys. These institutions are under the direction of the Sisters of Providence. There are, besides, 6 associations of Ladies

## Progress of the diocese

The first bishop of the Diocese of Joliette is Mgr. Joseph Alfred Archarnbault. Born at L'Assomption, 23 May, 1859, he made his classical studies at the College of L'Assomption and Laval University, Quebec, and his theological studies at the Grand Séminaire of Montreal. He received at Rome the degrees of Doctor of Theology and of Canon Law, and on his return taught philosophy at the College of L'Assomption (1885-88). He was made vice-chancellor of the Archdiocese of Montreal (1888-92); chancellor (1892-97); titular canon of the cathedral of Montreal (1891-1904); ecclesiastical superior of the Sisters of Providence (1891-1901); vicegerent and archdeacon (1897-1904), vice-rector of Laval University, Montreal (1901-04) appointed prothonotary Apostolic, 15 December, 1902, and Bishop of Joliette, 27 June, 1904. He was consecrated 24 August, 1904, in the cathedral of Joliette by Mgr. Bruchesi, Archbishop of Montreal, and preconized in public consistory 14 November in the same year. Since his consecration the diocesan educational and charitable institutions have multiplied and improved.

## Sources

ARCHAMBAULT, Statistique et notes historiques concernant le diocese de Joliette, 1904 1909 (Joliette, 1909); DALLAIRE, Les contemporains (Saint-Hyacinthe, 1908).
