# Pious Workers of St. Joseph Calasanctius of the Mother of God

*Founded at Vienna, 24 November, 1889, by Father Anton Maria Schwartz for all works of charity, but especially the apostolate among workingmen*

Founded at Vienna, 24 November, 1889, by Father Anton Maria Schwartz for all works of charity, but especially the apostolate among workingmen. The members of the congregation, who comprise both priests and lay brothers, follow the Rule of the Piarists, modified in some particulars.

The mother-house is the College of Mary Help of Christians, at Vienna, with which is connected a church. The Pious Workers teach Christian doctrine in schools, establish elementary and trade schools, build homes for apprentices and all workmen, open oratories, form associations of working-men, and promote the diffusion of good literature. At Vienna, which has been so far the chief scene of their activity, in addition to undertaking the works already mentioned, they have taken charge of the reformatory (1904), have opened a public library, and have founded among other associations a Guard of Honour of the Most Blessed Sacrament. They have three colleges at Vienna, and other foundations at Deutsch-Goritz in Styria and Wolfsgraben. The prayer-book for working-men compiled by Father Schwartz has already gone through five editions. Other fathers of the society have published dramas for presentation by clubs under their charge, a book of recitations, and a number of biographies. The organ of the congregation is "St. Calasanctius-Blätter", a monthly issued at Vienna since 1888.

## Sources

Heimbucher, Orden und Kongregationen, III (Paderborn, 1908), 524 sqq.; Siman, Die Kongr. der frommer Arbeiter (Vienna, 1894).
