# St. Juliana of Liège

*Devoted to the Blessed Sacrament, lobbied for the institution of the feast of Corpus Christi, d. 1258*

Nun, b. at Retinnes, near Liège, Belgium, 1193; d. at Fosses, 5 April, 1258. At the age of five she lost her parents and was placed in the convent of Mont-Cornillon, near Liège. She made rapid progress, and read with pleasure the writings of St. Augustine and St. Bernard. She also cultivated an ardent love of the Blessed Virgin, the Sacred Passion, and especially the Blessed Sacrament. In 1206 she received the veil, and devoted herself to the sick in the hospital in charge of the convent. She very early exerted every energy to introduce the feast of Corpus Christi. In 1230 she was chosen superioress by the unanimous vote of the community. But soon God sent heavy trials. Her convent was under the supervision of a general superior, Roger, a man of vicious and scandalous habits; he secured this position in 1233 by intrigues and bribery. Disliking the virtues and piety of Juliana, and much more her entreaties and reproaches, he incited the populace against her. She fled to the cell of St. Eve of Liège, and then to a house given her by John, a canon of Lausanne. Vindicated in the courts through the influence of Robert de Thorate, Bishop of Liège, she was restored to her position in the community, and Roger was deposed. But in 1247 Roger was again in power, and succeeded once more in driving out the saint. Juliana found refuge at Namur and then at Fosses, where she passed the last years of her life in seclusion. At her own request she was buried at Villiers. After her death a number of miracles occurred at her intercession (Acta SS., April, I, 435 sq.). In 1869 Pius IX ratified her veneration and permitted the office and Mass in her honour. Her feast is on 6 April.

## Sources

Messenger of the Sacred Heart (1898), 221; Irish Eccl. Record (1893), 1010; MONCHAMP, Les réliques de Ste-Julienne de Cornillon (Liège, 1898); SCHöRMANS in Ann. soc. archéol. Nivelles, VII (Nivelles, 1899), 1-68; CHEVALIER, Bio-Bibl.
