# Vicariate Apostolic of Northern Kan-Su

*This vicariate includes the territory of Ku-ku-nor, northern part of Tibet, and the five northern prefectures of the Chinese province of Kan-su: Lan-chou-fu, Si-ning-fu, Liang-chou-fu, Kan-chou-fu, and Su-chou*

This vicariate includes the territory of Ku-ku-nor, northern part of Tibet, and the five northern prefectures of the Chinese province of Kan-su: Lan-chou-fu, Si-ning-fu, Liang-chou-fu, Kan-chou-fu, and Su-chou. The climate varies according to the locality. In general, it is healthy, temperate, and bright. Kan-su is inhabited by Chinese, Turks from Turkestan, Mongols, Tangouses or Fan-tse. The vicariate contains about eight million inhabitants; among this number there are 2700 Catholics. The vicar Apostolic dwells at Sung-shu-chang-tsz in the prefecture of Liang-chou-fu. The province of Kan-su formed a part of the Vicariate Apostolic of Shen-si from 1844 to 1878, when it was separated, erected into a distinct vicariate Apostolic, and entrusted to the Belgian Congregation of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (Scheutveld, Brussels). In 1886 the northern civil prefecture of Ning-hia was confided to the Vicariate Apostolic of South-Western Mongolia. In 1888 the new Chinese province of Sin-kiang was formed into an independent mission, bearing the name of I-li or Kul-dja. In 1905 the seven southern civil prefectures were separated to form the Prefecture Apostolic of Southern Kan-su. The present vicar Apostolic is Mgr. Ubert Otto. He was consecrated titular Bishop of Assurita 13 Jan. 1891. In 1907 the mission had: 1 bishop, 16 European missionaries, 2 native priests, 24 churches and chapels, 9 schools with 127 students, 1 college with 25 students, 2 orphan asylums with 35 children, and 2498 Catholics. In 1908: 1 bishop, 20 missionaries, 1 native priest, 23 churches and chapels, and 2702 Catholics.
