# Andreas Kobler

*An historian, b. at Muhldorf in Bavaria, 22 June, 1816; d. at Klagenfurt, 15 November, 1892*

An historian, b. at Muhldorf in Bavaria, 22 June, 1816; d. at Klagenfurt, 15 November, 1892. He made his preliminary studies at Landshut, and studied theology at Munich, where Möhler and Görres appear to have awakened in the young theologian his preference for the study of history. After his ordination (1840) he was a curate on the mission for four years, after which he entered the novitiate of the Society of Jesus at Graz. Later he was sent to America on account of the disturbances of 1848 in his own country, and was attached to the New York mission for five years, being occupied mostly as professor of mathematics. Returning to Europe, he taught at Presburg until 1857, where he was sent to Innbruck as professor of church history. He held this chair for fourteen years, and was rector of the college of Innsbruck from 1861 to 1866. In 1871 he became once more professor of mathematics at Linz, and for two years rector of the college there. Returning then to Innsbruck, he dedicated nine years to literary work, was appointed superior (1887) of the seminary at Klagenfurt, where he was still vigorous and active in the pulpit when death overtook him in his seventy-sixth year. His literary works are for the most part on historical subjects. Besides contributions to periodicals, Kobler published: "Florian Bauke, ein Jesuit in Paraguay" (1870); "Die Aufhebung der Gesellschaft Jesu" (1873); "Eine innere Klosterschule im IX. Jahrhtmdert" (1876); "Die Märtyrer und Bekenner der Gesellschaft Jesu in England während der Jahre 1550-1681" (1886); "De Maistre, fünf Briefe über den öffentlichen Unterricht in Russland" (from the French); "Studien über die Klöster des Mittelalters" (from the English, 1867); "Katholisches Leben im Mittelalter" (from Kenelm Digby's "Mores Catholici", 1887-9) .

## Sources

BULOW, 100 Lebensbilder aus der osterr.-ungar. Provinz der Gesellshaft Jesu (Vienna, 1902); HOFMANN, Das Nikolaiheus in Innsbruck einst und jetzt (Innsbruck, 1908).
