# Ven. Louis of Casoria

*Friar Minor and founder of the Frati Bigi (1814-1885)*

Friar Minor

and founder of the Frati Bigi; b. at Casoria, near

Naples

, 11 March, 1814; d. at Pausilippo, 30 March, 1885. His name in the world was Archangelo Palmentiere. On 1 July, 1832, he entered the

Order of Friars Minor

, and shortly after the completion of the year's

novitiate

was appointed to teach

philosophy

and mathematics in the

Franciscan

convent

of San Pietro in

Naples

. Following the advice of his superiors, he instituted a branch of the

Third Order

at San Pietro from the members of which he formed later a religious institute, commonly known as the Frati Bigi on account of the grayish or ashen colour of their habits. Louis instituted likewise a congregation of religious

women

, known as the Suore Bigie, whom he placed under the protection of

St. Elizabeth of Hungary

. About the year 1852 he opened a

school

for the

education

of

African

boys and girls redeemed from

slavery

. Ten years before his death he was attacked with a serious and painful illness, from which he never completely recovered. The numerous

works of charity

in

Naples

,

Rome

,

Assisi

, and Florence which owe their origin to Louis of Casoria, as well as the fame for

sanctity

which he enjoyed even during his lifetime, account for the veneration in which he was held by all classes, high and low alike. The cause of his

beatification

was introduced in

Rome

in 1907.

## Sources

Acta Ordinis Minorum (May, 1907), 156-158; The Catholic World (November, 1895), 155-166; Voce di Sant' Antonio (July, 1907), 23-26.
