# Francisco de Lugo

*Jesuit theologian, b. at Madrid, 1580; d, at Valladolid, 17 September, 1652*

Jesuit theologian, b. at Madrid, 1580; d. at Valladolid, 17 September, 1652. he was the elder brother of Cardinal de Lugo, and, like him, a distinguished member of the Society of Jesus, which he entered at the novitiate of Salamanca in 1600. In answer to his request for the foreign missions, he was sent to Mexico, where, quite apart from any desire of his own, he was appointed to teach theology, a task which his rare talent enabled him to perform with much success. being recalled to Spain, he sailed in company with others under the protection of the Spanish fleet; but unfortunately during the voyage the Spanish encountered the Dutch, and in the ensuing struggle, Francisco de Lugo, although he succeeded in saving his life, could not save the greater part of his commentary on the entire Summa of St. Thomas. He subsequently taught both philosophy and theology in Spain, was a censor of books, and theologian to the general of the Society of Jesus at Rome. Having been twice rector of the College of Valladolid, he died with the reputation of being a brilliant theologian and a very holy man, especially remarkable for his humility. His published works are: "Theologia scholastica", "Decursus prævius ad theologian moralem", "De septem Ecclesiæ sacramentis, praxim potius quam speculationem, attendens et intendens"; "De sacramentis in genere".

## Sources

HURTER, Nomenclator literarius, I, 373; SOMMERVOGEL, Bibl de la C. de J., V. 75.
