# Ven. Charles Mahony

*Irish Franciscan priest who was executed at Ruthin in Wales in 1679. Short article includes a statement by the martyr*

Irish Franciscan martyr; b. after 1639; d. at Ruthin, Denbighshire, 12 August, 1679. The British Museum has a copy of a single sheet entitled "The Last Speeches of Three Priests that were Executed for Religion, Anno Domini 1679", from which the following transcript is made:—

> *"An Account of the words spoken by Mr.* Charles Mahony, *an* Irish *Priest of the holy Order of St.* Francis, *who was Executed in his Habit at* Ruthin *in* North Wales, *August 12, 1679.*
>
> Now God Almighty is pleased I should suffer Martyrdom, his Holy Name be praised, since I dye for my Religion. But you have no Right to put me to death in this Country, though I confessed myself to be a Priest, for you seized me as I was going to my Native Country *Ireland*, being driven at Sea on this Coast, for I never used my Function in *England* before I was taken, however God forgive you, as I do and shall always pray for you, especially for those that were so good to me in my distress, I pray God bless our King, and defend him from his Enemies, and convert him to the Holy Catholick Faith, *Amen*.
>
> *His Age was under Forty, He was tryed and Condemned at Denby* [i.e. Denbigh] *Confessing himself to be a Priest*."

Bishop Challoner bases his account of our martyr on the above-mentioned single sheet, but appears to have hold access to another authority now lost, for he writes: "He suffered with great constancy, being cut down alive and butchered according to the sentence, as I remember to have read in a manuscript, which I could not since recover." Subsequent writers add nothing to Bishop Challoner's narrative.

## Sources

CHALLONER, Memoirs of Missionary Pnests, II, no. 205; GILLOW, Bibl. Dict. Eng. Cath. IV, 392; STANTON, Menelogy of England and Wales (London, 1887); HOPE, Franciscan Martyrs in England (London, 1878), 240; OLIVER, Collections illustrating the History of the Catholic Religion (London, 1857), THADEUS, Franciscans in England (London and Leamington, 1898), 52, 71, 101.
