# Mammon

*Mamona; the spelling Mammona is contrary to the textual evidence and seems not to occur in printed Bibles till the edition of Elzevir*

*Mamona*; the spelling *Mammona* is contrary to the textual evidence and seems not to occur in printed Bibles till the edition of Elzevir. The derivation of the word is uncertain, perhaps from *mmn* as seen in *mtmwn*, though the Targums, which use the word frequently, never regard it as the equivalent of *mtmwn*, which the Greek always renders *thesauroi*, cf. Job 3:4; Proverbs 2:4. But cf. also Hebrew Sirach 42:9, *bth l'b mtmnt sqr* where the margin reads *mtmwn*, "to the father his daughter is as ill-gotten treasure." In the New Testament only Matthew 6:24, and Luke 16:9-13, the latter verse repeating Matthew 6:24. In Luke 16:9 and 11 Mammon is personified, hence the prevalent notion, emphasized by Milton, that Mammon was a deity. Nothing definite can be adduced from the Fathers in support of this; most of their expressions which seem to favour it may be easily explained by the personification in Luke; e.g. "Didascalia", "Do solo Mammona cogitant, quorum Deus est sacculus"; similarly St. Augustine, "Lucrum Punice Mammon dicitur" (Serm. on Mt., ii); St. Jerome in one place goes near to such an identification when (*Dialogue Against the Luciferians* 5 ) he quotes the words: "No man can serve two masters", and then adds, "What concord hath Christ with Belial?" But in his "Commentary on Matt," and in Epistle 22.31, he lends no countenance to it: "'Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.' Riches, that is; for in the heathen tongue of the Syrians riches are called Mammon." But Mammon was commonly regarded as a deity in the Middle Ages; thus Peter Lombard (II, dist. 6) says, "Riches are called by the name of a devil, namely Mammon, for Mammon is the name of a devil, by which name riches are called according to the Syrian tongue." Piers Plowman also regards Mammon as a deity.

The expression "Mammon of iniquity" has been diversely explained, it can hardly mean riches ill-gotten, for they should of course be restored. If we accept the derivation from *'mn* we may render it "riches in which men trust", and it is remarkable that the Septuagint of Psalm 37:3, renders *'mwgh* by *plouto*, or "riches", as though hinting at such a derivation. The expression is common in the Targums, where *mmwn* is often followed by *sqr* corresponding to the *adikias* of Luke, thus see on Proverbs 15:27; but it is noteworthy that Sirach 5:8 "goods unjustly gotten" *chremasin adikois*, reads in Hebrew *nks-sqr* and not *mtmwn*. For the various explanations given by the Fathers see St. Thomas, II-II.32.7 ad 3um.

## Sources

TRENCH, *Notes on the Parables of our Lord* (15th ed., London, 1886); DALMANN, *Die Worte Jesu* (tr., Edinburgh, 1902).
