# Luis Martin y Garcia

*Jesuit General (1846-1906)*

Twenty-fourth General of the Society of Jesus; born of humble parentage at Melgar de Fernamental, Burgos, Spain, 19 August, 1846; died at Fiesole, Italy, 18 April, 1906. After a course of six years in the seminary of Burgos, he entered the Society at Loyola, in 1864; studied philosophy at Léon, Vals (Haute-Loire, France), and Poyanne (Landes, France), and theology at the last-named place, where he also taught theology. He was ordained priest in 1876, was successively rector of the seminary of Salamanca, director of "El Mensajero" (The Messenger), superior of the college of Deusto-Bilbao, provincial of Castile, and vicar; and was general of the Society from 2 October, 1892, until his death. The disease (sarcoma) which ended his life necessitated the amputation of an arm and other painful operations, which he bore with Christian fortitude. His superior talents were shown in such splendid works as the rebuilding of the great seminary at Salsmanca, the foundation of the Cornillense seminary, and his plan for compiling the history of the Society. In prose he wrote with a nervous and graceful style, in verse with a robust sonority and great wealth of imagery, while as a preacher the elegance of his diction, the profundity of his thought, and his emotional warmth made him almost unrivaled among the Spanish orators of his time. His published works include: *Discurso leido en el tercer centenario de la muerte de Sta. Teresa* (discourse on St. Teresa's centenary), (Madrid, 1882; Bilbao, 1891; Barcelona, 1908); *De Studiis Theologicis ordinandis* (Bilbao, 1892); an epistle to the fathers and brothers of the society; articles in *El Mensajero*, I (1886), of which he was editor for some years; and some uncollected poems.
