# John Martinov

*Jesuit and writer. Born 7 October, 1821; died 26 April, 1894*

Born 7 October, 1821; died 26 April, 1894. Having passed through his university course at St. Petersburg with distinction, Count Schouvalov engaged him as tutor to his children during a tour through Europe. In France he became acquainted with Father de Ravignan, and this led to his reception into the Church. Being now unable to return to Russia, he entered the French Jesuits, 18 September, 1845. Similarly his Patrons Count Schouvalov, having also become a Catholic, joined the Barnabites. Father Martinov, like Father Gagarin, with whom he often co-operated, could now only reach his countrymen by his writings, and devoted himself to literature and correspondence with great success. He wrote frequently for the "Revue des Questions Historiques", for "Polybiblion", and "Les Etudes Religieuses". Called by Pius IX to Rome as a papal theologian for the Vatican Council, he was afterwards a consultor of the Propaganda in matters connected with Oriental rites. The last days of his busy, well-filled life were passed at Cannes. His bibliography, under fifty-two titles, comprises works of every class, in Russian, French, and Latin. His most notable work is the "Annus Ecclesiasticus Graeco Slavonicus", which forms part of the eleventh volume of the Bollandist "Acta Sanctorum", for October (Brussels, 1863).

## Sources

Precis Historiques (Brassels, 1894), 291; Polybiblion (1894), ser. II, vol. 39, 540; SOMMERVOGEL, Bibliotheque de 1a Compagnie de Jesus, IX, 645-52.
