# Prefecture Apostolic of Misocco and Calanca

*This prefecture in the canton of Grisons, Switzerland, comprises the valley of the Moesa which starts at the pass of San Bernardino and flows into the Ticino, and also the valley of Calanca, through which the Calasanca flows*

(MESAUCINAE ET CALANCAE).

This prefecture in the canton of Grisons, Switzerland, comprises the valley of the Moesa which starts at the pass of San Bernardino and flows into the Ticino, and also the valley of Calanca, through which the Calancasca flows. The population is 6027, of whom 6011 are Catholic (5945 Italians). For administrative purposes the prefecture is divided into two chapters, both of which are subject to an episcopal Vicar of the See of Chur. In the chapter of Misocco, which embraces the valley of Moesa, there are 8 parishes, 5 Capuchins and 4 secular priests. In the chapter of Calanca there are 11 parishes, with 5 Capuchins and 3 seculars. At Misocco (Mesocco in Italian) there is a canonry with a prior and six canons of whom three reside in Misocco and three in San Vittore. At Roveredo there is a Catholic Institute of St. Anna, under the Fathers of the "Piccola Casa della Providenza". The prefecture was established in 1635 at the suggestion of Bishop Joseph Mohr of Chur, at whose instance the Propaganda sent Capuchin missionaries to the Italian-speaking inhabitants of Grisons valleys of Misocco and Calanca. Capuchins from Milan were the first missionaries; from 1790-1802 Novara and then until 1850 Pavia Capuchins had charge; since then the mission has been administered by the Capuchins of Ticino. The vice-prefect, Father Hilarin Odelino, resides at Cama.

## Sources

BUCHI, Die katholische Kirche in der Schweiz (Munich, 1902); DAUCOURT, Les eveches suisses (Fribourg, 1901); Missiones Catholicae (Rome, 1907), 105; Geographisches Lexicon der Schweiz (Neuenburg, 1902-08).
