# Bonino Mombritius

*A philologist, humanist, and editor of ancient writings, born 1424; died between 1482 and 1502*

A philologist, humanist, and editor of ancient writings, born 1424; died between 1482 and 1502. He was descended from a noble but not very wealthy family of Milan, and studied the Latin and Greek classics at Ferrara, with zeal and success. Later he became a teacher of Latin at Milan, and was highly esteemed, not only for his extensive knowledge and his literary works, but also for his earnest religious life, as may be gleaned from the letters of his contemporaries. He suffered many misfortunes, which, however, did not affect his industry. His literary importance lies especially in his editions of ancient writings. The following may be mentioned: "Chronica Eusebii, Hieronymi, Prosperi et Matthæi Palmerii" (Milan, 1475); "Scriptores rei Augustæ" (1475); "Papiæ Glossarium" (1476): "Mirabilia mundi" of Solinus (s. l. a.). A very notable contribution to hagiography is his collection of records of the martyrdom and lives of saints, which appeared under the title: "Sanctuarium" (2 folio vols., s. l. a.), probably printed in 1480, and recently edited (Paris, 1910) by the Benedictines of Solesmes (Boninus Mombritius, Sanctuarium seu vitæ Sanctorum. Novam editionem cur. monachi Solesmenses. 2 tomi). He also composed poems, some of which were published in his editions of the ancient writings, and some printed separately. Of the latter may be particularly mentioned "De passione Domini" (reprinted, Leipzig, 1499).

## Sources

*De vita et operibus Bonini Mombritii testimonia selecta* in the above-mentioned new edition of the *Sanctuarium*, I (Paris, 1910). xiii-xxix; FABRICIUS, *Bibl. lat.*, V (Hamburg, 1736), 257; *Bibl.-script. Mediolan.*, I (Milan, 1754), cxlvi-cliii; HURTER, *Nomenclator*, II (3rd ed., Innsbruck, 1906), 1055.
