# David Moriarty

*Bishop and pulpit orator, b. in Ardfert, Co. Kerry, in 1812; d. 1 October, 1877*

Bishop and pulpit orator, b. in Ardfert, Co. Kerry, in 1812; d. 1 October, 1877. He received his early education in a classical school of his native diocese, and later was sent to Boulogne-sur-Mer, France. From there he passed to Maynooth, and after a distinguished course in theology was elected to the Dunboyne establishment, where he spent two years. While yet young priest he was chosen by the episcopal management of the Irish College in Paris, as vice-president of that institution; which position he occupied for about four years. So satisfactory was his work that, on the death of Father Hand, he was appointed President of All Hallows missionary college, Dublin, and for years guided, fashioned, and made effective the discipline and teaching of that well known institution. It was during this time he gave evidence of the noble oratory, so chaste, so elevated, so various, and so convincing, that has some to be associated with his name. In 1854 he was appointed coadjutor, with the right of succession, to the See of Kerry, under the title of Bishop of Antigonia: and two years later succeeded to that see. His work as bishop is testified to by several churches and schools, a diocesan college, and many conventual establishments. He found time to conduct retreats for priests and his addresses which have come down to us under the title "Allocutions to the Clergy" are characterized by profound thought, expressed in an elevated and oratorical style. In his political views he ran counter to much of the popular feeling of the time, and was a notable opponent of the Fenian organization, which he denounced strongly. Still, he was a great patriot of the type of O'Connell, for whom he had a great admiration. His principal works are: "Allocutions to the Clergy" and two volumes of sermons.
