# Daniel Murray

*An Archbishop of Dublin, b. 1768, at Sheepwalk, near Arklow, Ireland; d. at Dublin*

An Archbishop of Dublin, b. 1768, at Sheepwalk, near Arklow, Ireland; d. at Dublin. He was educated at Dr. Betagh's school in and at Salamanca and ordained priest in 1790. After some years as curate in Dublin he was transferred to Arklow, and was there in 1798 when the rebellion broke out. The soldiers shot the parish priest in bed and Murray, to escape a similar fate, fled to the city where for several years after he ministered as curate. In 1809 at the request of Archbishop Troy he was appointed coadjutor-bishop, and in 1823, on Dr. Troy's death, he became Archbishop of Dublin. While coadjutor he had filled for one year the position of president of Maynooth College. Dr. Murray was a uncompromising opponent of the "veto" and a strong supporter of the Catholic Association. On other questions he was less advanced, and was in such favour at Dublin Castle that he was once offered a seat on the Privy Council, which he declined. He supported Stanley's National Education scheme and among the first Education Commissioners, he wished to tolerate the Queen's Colleges, in opposite to the views of Archbishop MacHale. He had hesitation, however, in accepting the adverse decision of Rome, and was present at the Synod of Thurles where the Queen's Colleges were formally condemned. He was a charitable, kindly man, respected even his opponents.

## Sources

D'ALTON, Archbishops of Dublin (Dublin, 1838); HEALY, Centenary History of Maynooth College (Dublin, 1895); MEAGHER, Life of Archbishop Murray (Dublin, 1853); FITZPATRICK, Life of Dr. Doyle (Dublin, 1880); O'REILLY, Life of Archbishop MacHale (New York, 1890).
