# John Paul Nazarius

*Dominican theologian (1556-1645)*

Dominican theologian, b. in 1556 at Cremonia; d. in 1645 at Bologna. He entered the order at an early age in his native town and from the beginning was noted for his spirituality and love of study. It is most probable that he studied philosophy and theology at the University of Bologna. He taught with great success in various schools of his order in Italy. In 1592 he was sent by Clement VIII and the General of the Dominicans, Beccaria, to accompany the Apostolic Nuncio to Prague to combat the prevailing heresies. These he spent three years teaching in the *Studium Generale* of the province, lecturing on theology in the university, preaching, and defending the Faith against the errors of the innovators. Returning to Italy in 1596 he became regent of studies in the convent at Milan. The following year the pope appointed him to defend in a public disputation at Chiavenna the Catholic doctrine of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass against Calvinistic preachers. His learning and eloquence won for him such a triumph that his services were sought in other parts of the country. In 1620 the citizens of Milan chose him as ambassador to the Court of Philip III of Spain to adjust certain matters of Importance to Milan; in May, 1622 he represented as definitor the province of Lombardy at the general chapter held at Milan. He spent the close of his life at Bologna where he occupied himself with teaching and writing. Of his works the following are the most important: "Commentaria et Controversiae in primam partem Summæ S. Thomae" (Bologna, 1620) and "in tertiam partem Summæ S. Thomae" (Bologna 1625); "Opuscula varia theologica et philosophica" (Bologna, 1630) in which are contained the acts of the above mentioned disputation, "De SS. Patrum et doctorum Ecclesiae auctoritate in doctrina theologica" (Bologna, 1633).

## Sources

QUETIF-ECHARD, SS. Ord. Praed., Il. 544; TOURON, Hom. Ill. de l'ordre de S. Dom., V, 258-68.
