# Neusohl

*Diocese founded in 1776 by Maria Theresa.*

Diocese of Neusohl (Hung. Beszterczebânya; Lat. Neosoliensis), founded in 1776 by Maria Theresa. Cardinal Peter Pazmány had already contemplated founding four new sees in order to relieve the Archdiocese of Gran; one of these was Neusohl, but this project was dropped in 1636. Instead of four sees, four Jesuit colleges were established in Kassa, Neusohl, Kossy, and Safron, After the suppression of the Jesuit Order the project of the new diocese was again taken up. On 7 December, 1775, Maria Theresa informed the cathedral chapter of Gran that it had been decided to establish a new see, and asked the chapter to state what revenues would be assigned to it. On 11 January, 1776, the new diocese was founded by royal decision, and on 13 March, the papal decree was made public. Baron Franz Berchtold was named the first bishop (1776-93), and in 1778-85 held the first canonical Visitation. His efforts to benefit the diocese materially were unsuccessful, and the great fire of 1782, which destroyed the episcopal residence, had such a bad effect upon the see, that Joseph II contemplated giving it up, and planned the transfer of Berchtold to the See of Gran, but the bishop opposed the plan, as well as that of the union of the diocese with that of Székes or Roszsnyó. The seminary, lyceum and the four archdeaneries were founded in the time of Bishop Anton Mackay (1818-23). A diocesan synod was held at Neusohl 21 November, 1821, where the diocesan constitution was drawn up, which is valid to this day. Bishop Joseph Rudnyciuszky (184-50) was persecuted by the Austrian Government on account of his political views, and on 20 August, 1846, was arrested and sentenced to six years' imprisonment, and deprived of his episcopal honours. He retracted in 1850, whereupon he was released from prison. Among the more recent bishops Arnold Tpolzi was distinguished. The present bishop is Wolfang Radnoi. Since 1835 the cathedral chapter possesses its own insignia, and is composed of six members; there are also six titular canons. The diocese has a provost, 112 parishes, and 371 chapels; there are 168 priests and 49 clerics, 2 monasteries and 2 nunneries. In 1902 the Catholic population numbered in all 223,779 souls.

## Sources

Das Katolische Ungarn (Catholic Hungary) (Budapest, 1801); Schematismus diæcesis Neosoliensis pro anno 1903.
