# Neville

*Biographies of Edmund (1605-1647), Edmund (1563-1648), Edward (1663-1735) and various other Nevilles*

(1) Edmund Neville (*alias* Sales), a Jesuit, born at Hopcut, Lancashire, 1605; died in England, 18 July, 1647. Educated at St. Omer, he entered the English College, Rome, 29 June, 1621, where he distinguished himself in philosophy. He joined the Jesuits, 24 May, 1626; was stationed at Ghent 1636, and sent on the London mission, 1637. He was professed, 3 August, 1640; served in the Oxford district, 1642, and in South Wales, 1645. Being a suspected priest he was seized under the Commonwealth but soon released. He wrote the "Palm of Christian Fortitude" (St.Omer, 1630), an account of the Japanese persecutions; a "Life of St. Augustine" and "Second Thoughts" both unprinted.

(2) His uncle Edmund Neville (*alias* Elijah Nelson), probably the son of Sir John Neville of Leversedge, born in Yorkshire about 1563; died 1648, his death hastened by the treatment he received in prison. Ordained for the English mission, 12 April, 1608, he entered the Society, 1609. He is considered to have been the *de jure* seventh Earl of Northumberland.

(3) Many members of the Scarisbrick family of Scarisbrick Hall, near Ormskirk, became Jesuits during the penal times and assumed the *alias* "Neville". Among them were Edward Scarisbrick (Neville), born 1639. Educated at St. Omer, he entered the Society at Watten, 7 September 1660 and was stationed at Liège, 1671, and St. Omer 1675. Sent to England he was one of Oates's intended victims. James II appointed him royal chaplain. He was instructor of the Jesuit tertians at Ghent, 1693. He returned to Lancashire, where he died, 19 February, 1708-9. He wrote "Life of Lady Warner" (St. Omer, 1691); "Catholic Loyalty" (London, 1688); "Rules and Instructions for the Sodality of the Immaculate Conception", etc.

(4) Edward Neville (Scarisbrick), born 1663; died 15 November, 1735. He became a Jesuit, 1682; served on the Derbyshire mission, 1701, and after 1728 at Bushey Hall, Watford, Herts.

(5) Edward Neville (Scarisbrick), born 1698; died 7 July 1778. He entered the Society, 7 September, 1728. Superior of the Derbyshire mission, 1764, he laboured also in Lancashire.

(6) Sir Edward Neville, son of Baron Bergavenny, a courtier of Henry VIII, took part in the war in France, and was made the king's standard bearer, 1531. He married Eleanor, daughter of Lord, Windsor. Arrested 3 November, 1538, on the charge of conspiracy with the brother of Cardinal Pole, he was sent to the Tower, tried at Westminster, and beheaded for the faith, 8 December.
