# Gabriele Paleotti

*Cardinal and Archbishop of Bologna (1522-1597)*

Cardinal and Archbishop of Bologna. Born at Bologna, 4 October, 1522; died at Rome, 22 July, 1597. Having acquired, in 1546, the title of Doctor of Civil and Canon Law, he was appointed to teach civil law. In 1549 he became canon of the cathedral, but he did not become a priest until later. He gave up teaching in 1555, and although he had many times refused the episcopal dignity, he became in 1556 auditor of the Rota. Pius IV sent him to the Council of Trent, where he played an important role. His "Diarium", or journal, on the proceedings of the council, forms one of the most important documents for its history. The complete text will be published in the third volume of the "Concilium Tridentinum. Diariorum, Actorum, Epistularum, tractatuum nova collectio, edidit Societas Goerresiana" (Freiburg; see Vol. 1, ed. S. Merkle, p. XXXVI, Freiburg, 1901). A résumé was published by Mendham (London, 1842) and Theiner ("Acta Concilii Tridentini", Agram, 1874, II, 523-580). After the council Paleotti became one of the commission of cardinals and prelates that served as a basis of the Congregation of the Council. On 12 March, 1565, he became cardinal, and on 13 January, 1567, was made Bishop of Bologna; he was also the first archbishop, for in 1582 this see became an archdiocese. His biographers never cease praising his zeal in introducing the Tridentine reforms in his diocese, comparing his activity at Bologna to that of Saint Charles Borromeo at Milan. The latter held him in high esteem. In 1589 Paleotti became Cardinal-Bishop of Albano and in 1591 of Sabina. There also he distinguished himself by his zeal for reform. At the conclave in 1590 which elected Gregory XIV, he obtained the votes of an important minority. His principal works are: "De nothis spuriisque filiis liber" (Bologna, 1850; Frankfort, 1573; The Hague, 1655); "De sacris et profanis imaginibus libri V" (Bologna, 1582; Ingoldstadt, 1594); "Episcopale Bononiensis civitatis" (Bologna, 1580), and "Archiepiscopale Bonoiensis civitatis" (Rome, 1594), remarkable works dealing with the good administration of a diocese; "De sacris consistorii consultationibus" (Ingolstadt, 1594; Rome, 1596); "De bono senectutis" (Rome, 1595).
