# Diocese of Pasto

*Diocese and town in Colombia, South America*

(PASTENSIS, PASTOPOLITANA).

A Colombian see, suffragan of Popayan, from which it was separated by the Bull of Pius IX, "In excelsa militantibus ecclesia", 10 April, 1859. Situated in the State of Cauca, it is bounded on the north by the Dioocese of Garzon and Popanyan, and on the south by the Vicariate Apostolic of Napo, Ecuador. The present bishop, Mgr Adolfo Perea, b. 1853 in the Diocese of Popayan, elected 16 December, 1907, succeeded Mgr Ezequiel Moreno, O.S.A. (b. at Alfaro, Tarazona, 9 April, 1838, made titular Bishop of Pinra, 23 October, 1893, transferred to Pasto, 2 December, 1893. The diocese contains 315,640 Catholics 41,000 pagan Indians, 68 parishes, 90 secular and 23 regular priests, 133 churches or chapels. The town of Pasto, containing about 12,000 inhabitants, is well built and is a busy trade centre between Colombia and Ecuador. It is situated at the eastern base of the volcano La Galera at an altitude of 8650 feet. Founded in 1539, it was captured by Bolivar during the War of Independence in 1822, and suffered severely from an earthquake in 1834. It contains many churches, a seminary, a Jesuit college, and an hospital under the care of the Sisters of Charity. On 23 December, 1904, the Prefecture Apostolic of Caquieta (a.v.) was separated from Pasto.

## Sources

GROOT, Hist. Eclesiastica y civil de Nueva Granada (1869); CIEZA DE LEON, Cronica del Peru, I (Antwerp, 1554); PETRE, The Republic of Colombia (London, 1906).
