# Pax in the Liturgy

*A liturgical salutation ('Peace be with you')*

*Pax vobis* (or *vobiscum*), like the other liturgical salutations (e.g. *Dominus vobiscum*), is of Scriptural origin. The Gospels contain such forms as: "veniet pax vestra, "pax vestra revertetur ad vos" (Matthew 10:13), "Pax huic domui" (Luke 10:5), "Pax vobis" (Luke 24:36; John 20:21, 26). The salutation, "Gratia vobis et pax" or "Gratia misericordia et pax", is the opening formula of most of the Epistles of St. Paul and of St. Peter, and occurs also in those of St. John as well as in the Apocalypse. The formula was quoted from the Old Testament by Our Lord and His Apostles (cf. especially "Pax vobiscum", "Pax tecum", Genesis 43:23; Judges 6:23), and was thus naturally preserved in the liturgy and in Christian epigraphy as a memorial of Apostolic times. Like the *Dominus vobiscum*, it was first used in the liturgy (in the form of *Pax vobis*) by the bishop in welcoming the faithful at the beginning of the Mass before the Collect or the *Oratio*. When the *Confiteor*, *Introit*, *Gloria in excelsis* were added at a later period, the *Pax vobis* or the *Dominus vobiscum* was preserved. The form *Pax vobis* is now employed by bishops and prelates only — *Dominus vobiscum* being used by priests — at the first Collect. Hence the *Dominus vobiscum* became the ordinary introduction to all the orations and most of the prayers. The Greeks have preserved the *Pax omnibus* or *Pax vobiscum*. There was formally a certain rivalry between the two formulae, *Pax vobis* and *Dominus vobiscum*, and some councils (notably that of Braga in 563) ordained that both bishops and priests should employ the same form of salutation (for the texts, see the bibliography). Besides this episcopal or sacerdotal salutation, the words *Pax tecum*, *Pax vobis*, or *Pax vobiscum* are used in the Liturgy at the kiss of peace. On such occasions the Liturgy contains prayers or collects *ad pacem* (cf. Kiss; Cabrol in "Dict. d'archéol. et de liturgie", s.v. "Baiser de Paix", where all references are given). In the Ambrosian Liturgy, at the end of the Mass, the people are dismissed with the words: "Ite in pace" (cf. "Auctarium Solesmense", 95). Dom Martene (op. cit. in bibliography, III, 171, 174) gives other instances of the use of the word Pax. In Christian epigraphy there is a variety of formulae: pax; in pace; pax tecum; vivas in pace; requiescat in pace; pax Christi tecum sit; anima dulcissima requiescas in pace; dormit in pace; in locum refrigerii, lucis et pacis (from the formula in the Mass at the Momento of the Dead). *See* EARLY CHRISTIAN INSCRIPTIONS; Le Blant, "Inscriptions chret. de la Gaule", I, 264, etc.; Northcote, "Epitaphs of the Catacombs" (London, 1878), v, and bibliography.

## Sources

In addition to the works and articles cited in the text, consult: Peter Damian, an opusculum on *Dominus Vobiscum* in *P.L.* CXLV, 234; Zaccaria, *Onomasticon*, s. vv. *Pax vobis* and *Salutatio episcopalis*; Bona *Rerum liturg.*, III, 12, 88 sqq.; Smith, *Dict. of Christ. Antiq.*, s.v. *Pax* (cf. *Dominus vobiscum*); *De dignitate sacerdotali* (not written by St. Ambrose, as was long believed, but by Gerbert), v, in *P.L.*., XVII, 598 and CXXXIX, 175, contains an important text on this subject; Rocca *De salutatione sacerdotis in missa et divinis officiis* in *Thesaurus antiquitat.*, I (Rome, 1745), 236; Martene, *De antiq. eccles. ritibus*, I, 151 sqq.; Mamachi, *Origines et antiq. christ.*, IV, 479; III, 17, 19; *Ephemerides liturg.* (Feb., 1910), 108; Probst, *Die abendlandische Messe,* 104, 404, 437; see *Dominus Vobiscum*, V, 114; Cabrol in *Dict. d'archeol. chret.*, s.v. *Acclamations*. For the formula *Pax* and other formulas in funeral epigraphy, cf. EARLY CHRISTIAN INSCRIPTIONS; Kirsch, *Die Acclamationen u. Gebete der altchristl. Grabschriften* (Cologne, 1897); Idem *Les acclamations des epitaphes chret. de l'antiquite et les prieres liturg. pour les defunts* in IV *Congres scientifique des Catholiques* (Fribourg, 1898), 113-22; Syxto, *Notiones archaeol. christ.*, II, *Epigraphia*, 94 sqq.; Cabrol, *La priere pour les morts* in *Revue d'apologetique* (15 Sept., 1909); Idem, *Livre de la priere antique,* 67, 69.
