# Ven. John Pibush

*English priest and missionary to his native land, imprisoned for more than six years, on trial twice for the crime of being a priest, martyred at Waterings in 1600 or 1601*

English martyr, born at Thirsk, Yorkshire; died at St Thomas's Waterings, Camberwell, 18 February, 1600-1.

According to Gillow he was probably a son of Thomas Pibush, of Great Fencott, and Jane, sister to Peter Danby of Scotton. He came to Reims on 4 August, 1580, received minor orders and subdiaconate in September, and diaconate in December, 1586, and was ordained on 14 March, 1587. He was sent on the English mission on 3 January, 1588-9, arrested at Morton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire, in 1593, and sent to London, where he arrived before 24 July. The Privy Council committed him to the Gatehouse at Westminster, where he remained a year. He was then tried at the Gloucester Assizes under 27 Eliz., c. 2, for being a priest, but not sentenced, and was returned to Gloucester gaol, whence he escaped on 19 February (1594-5). The next day he was recaptured at Matson and taken back to Gloucester gaol, whence he was sent to the Marshalsea, London, and again tried under the same statute at Westminster on 1 July, 1595. He was sentenced to suffer the penalties of high treason at St. Thomas's Waterings, and in the meantime was to be returned to the Marshalsea. However, by the end of the year he was in the Queen's Bench prison, where he remained for more than five years. The sentence was carried out after one day's notice.

## Sources

KNOX, *Douay Diaries* (London, 1878), 169, 179, 198, 212, 214, 222; POLLEN, *Acts of the English Martyrs* (London, 1901), 333-6; *English Martyrs, 1584- 1603* (London Cath. Rec. Soc., 1908), 337-40; GILLOW, *Bibl. Dict. Eng. Cath.,* s.v.; CHALLONER, *Missionary Preists,* I, n. 123; DASENT, *Acts of the Privy Council* (London, 1880-1907) xxiv, 421.
