# Abbey of Pontigny

*Second daughter of Citeaux in the Diocese of Sens*

Second daughter of Cîteaux, was situated on the banks of the Serain, present Diocese of Sens, Department of Yonne. Hildebert (or Ansius), a canon of Auxerre, petitioned St. Stephen of Cîteaux to found a monastery in a place he had selected for this purpose. St. Stephen in 1114 sent twelve monks under the guidance of Hugh of Mâcon, a friend and kinsman of St. Bernard. The sanctity of their lives soon attracted so great a number of subjects that during the lifetime of the first two abbots, Hugh and Guichard, twenty-two monasteries were founded. So greet an array of episcopal sees in France were filled by men taken from its members, and to such a number of renowned personages did it offer hospitality that it was called the "cradle of bishops and the asylum for great men". Amongst the former must be mentioned particularly Blessed Hugh of Mâcon, Bishop of Auxerre (d. 1151); Gerard, Cardinal Bishop of Præneste (d. 1202); Robert, Cardinal Titular of St. Pudentiana, (d. 1294); amongst the latter are mentioned especially three Archbishops of Canterbury, St. Thomas, Stephen Langton, and St. Edmund, who was interred there. Discipline gradually became relaxed, especially from 1456, when the abbey was given *in commendam*. In 1569 the monastery was pillaged and burnt by the Huguenots, nothing being saved, except the relics of St. Edmund. Partly restored, it continued in existence until suppressed at the French Revolution. It is now in charge of the Fathers of St. Edmund, established there by J.B. Muard in 1843.

## Sources

JONGELINUS, Notitia Abbatiarum O. Cist. (Cologne, 1640); MANRIQUE, Annales Cister. (Lyons, 1642); LE NAIN, Essai de l'Hist. de l'Ordre de Cîteaux (Paris, 1696); MARTÈNE and DURAND, Voyage litt. (Paris, 1716); KOBLER, Klöster d. Mittelalters (Ratisbon, 1867); HENRY, Hist. de Pontigny (Auxerre, 1839); MABILLON, Annales O.S. Benedicti, V (Lucques, 1740); Gallia Christiana, XII; JANAUSCHEK, Originum (Vienna, 1877).
