# Archdiocese of Port-au-Prince

*Archdiocese and city in Haiti*

(PORTUS PRINCIPIS)

This archdiocese comprises the western part of the Republic of Haiti. Its population numbers about 668,700, mostly Catholics, the greater part of whom have but a slight knowledge of their religion, and are scattered over a surface of about 3080 sq. miles. The archdiocese was created by the Bull of 3 June, 1861, and has ever since had a clergy almost exclusively French. In the eighteenth century the territory of the present archdiocese was served by the Dominicans, and after the French Revolution was left in the hands of unworthy clergy, who were driven out after the Concordat of 1860. The archdiocese has had five archbishops: Mgrs, Testard du Cosquer (1863-69); Guilloux (1870-85); Hillion (1886-90); Tonti (1894-1902); Conan (1903). In January, 1906, Most Rev. Julian Conan held the first provincial council of Haiti whose acts were approved by the Congregation of the Council, 3 August, 1907. Fourteen diocesan synods have also been held and their acts and statutes have regularly been published. The seminary for senior students is in France (St. Jacques, Finistère), and there is a seminary-college at Port-au-Prince directed by the Fathers of the Holy Ghost with 500 pupils. About an equal number of boys receive their instruction at the Institution St. Louis de Gonzague, kept by the Brothers of Christian Instruction. There are two secondary establishments for girls: Ste Rose de Lima directed by the Sisters of St. Joseph de Cluny, and Notre Dame du Sacré-Cœur, directed by the Filles de la Sagesse. The province has a monthly religious bulletin published at Port-au-Prince. Archbishop Guilloux has left a valuable work for the history of the archdiocese and of the province, "Le Concordat d'Haiti, ses résultats", a pamphlet of twenty-eight pages relating to the origin of the different diocesan works. The metropolitan church has honorary canons, not constituting a chapter, and named by the archbishop. The archdiocese (1911) has 24 parishes, 140 rural chapels; priests, 55 secular, 42 regular; 67 Brothers of Instruction; 192 sisters.
