# George Porter

*Archbishop of Bombay (1825-1889)*

Archbishop of Bombay, b. 1825 at Exeter, England; d. at Bombay, 28 September, 1889. Of Scottish descent, he was educated at Stonyhurst and joined the Society of Jesus in 1841. After making his novitiate at Hodder, and devoting three years to philosophy at Stonyhurst, he was employed in teaching at Stonyhurst, and at St. Francis Xavier's College, Liverpool, becoming prefect of studies at the former college in 1849. In 1853 he went to St. Beuno's College, North Wales, for theology, and in 1856 was ordained priest. His theological studies were completed in Rome under Passaglia and Schrader. After two years more spent at Stonyhurst and a year Liesse, near Laon, Father Porter returned to St. Beuno's, where for four years he occupied the chair of dogmatic theology. He was then appointed rector at Liverpool, but was moved to London in 1871, becoming master of novices two year later. In 1881 he was appointed rector of Farm Street, London, but was soon called to Fiesole as assistant to the general. In December, 1886, he was made Archbishop of Bombay. Father Porter's collected "Letters" (1891) reveal the versatility of his mind, and his skill in direction. He translated or wrote prefaces for a number of spiritual books and compiled "The Priest's Manual for the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass" (Liverpool, 1858). Some of his meditations and considerations have been printed for private circulation.

## Sources

GILLOW, Bibl. Dic. Eng. Cath. s.v.
