# Raymond of Sabunde

*Teacher and writer (d. 1432)*

(SABONDE, SEBON, SEBEYDE, etc.)

Born at Barcelona, Spain, towards the end of the fourteenth century; died 1432. From 1430 to his death he taught theology, philosophy, and medicine at the University of Toulouse. Apparently, he wrote several works on theology and philosophy, only one of which remains, "Theologia Naturalis". It was first written in Spanish translated into French by Montaigne (Paris, 1569) and into Latin at various times (e.g. Deventer, 1487; Strasburg, 1496; Paris, 1509; Venice, 1581, etc.). Montaigne bears witness to the extraordinary popularity which the work enjoyed in his day. It represents a phase of decadent Scholasticism, and is a defence of a point of view which is subversive of the fundamental principle of the Scholastic method. The Schoolmen of the thirteenth century, while holding that there can be no contradiction between theology and philosophy, maintain that the two sciences are distinct. Raymond breaks down the distinction by teaching a kind of theosophy, the doctrine, namely that, as man is a connecting link between the natural and the supernatural, it is possible by a study of human nature to arrive at a knowledge even of the most profound mysteries of Faith. The tendency of his thought is similar to that of the rationalistic theosophy of Raymond Lully.

## Sources

DE WULF, History of Medieval Philosophy, tr. COFFEY (New York, 1909), 455 sq.; STOCKL, Gesch. der Phil. des Mittelalters, II (Mainz, 1865), 105 sq.
