# Théophile Raynaud

*French theologian and writer (1583-1663)*

Theologian and writer, b. at Sospello near Nice, 15 Nov., 1583; d. at Lyons, 31 Oct., 1663. He entered the Society of Jesus, 21 November, 1602, taught grammar and humanities at Avignon, philosophy and theology at Lyons and for a time at Rome. He was very zealous for souls, a theologian of broad erudition and a writer of great fertility, having produced ninety-two separate works, covering almost the entire field of theology. His style, however, is often prolix and sometimes obscure, whilst in his controversial writings he indulges in satire and invective. His collected works, revised by himself shortly before his death, were published under the direction of his confrère, Fr. John Bertet, in nineteen volumes (Lyons, 1665). A twentieth volume, entitled "Th. Raynaudi Apopompaeus" (i.e. the scapegoat), containing a number of writings which the author had purposely excluded from the collection, was published by an anonymous editor a few years later (Cracow, 1669); this volume was condemned by the Congregation of the Index. The main titles alone of the "Opera" are given, to show the nature and extent of his writings: I. "Theologia Patrum; Christus Deus Homo"; II. "De Attributis Christi"; III. "Moralis disciplina"; IV. "De virtutibus et vitiis"; V. "Theologia naturalis"; VI. "Opuscula eucharistica"; VII. "Marialia"; VIII-IX. "Hagiologium"; X. "Pontificia"; XI. "Critica sacra"; XII. "Miscella sacra"; XIII. "Miscella philologica"; XIV. "Moralia"; XV-XVI. "Heteroclita spiritualia"; XVII. "Ascetica"; XVIII. "Polemica". XIX contains general indices.

## Sources

WEISS in MICHAUD, Biog. Universelle, XXXVII (Paris, 1824); HURTER, Nomenclator Literarius, I (Innsbruck, 1892), 404 sqq.; SOMMERVOGEL, Bibl. de la C. de J., VI (Brussels, 1895).
