# Synods of Reims

*History of a series of synods held at the French city*

The first synod said to have been held at Reims by Archbishop Sonnatius between 624 and 630 is probably identical with that held at Clichy (Clippiacum) in 626 or 627. In 813 Archbishop Wulfar presided at a synod of reform (Werminghoff in "Mon. Germ. Hist.: Concilia aevi Carol. I", I, Hanover, 1904, 253 sq.). On 17 June, 991, Abp. Siguin of Sens presided in the basilica of St. Basle, near Reims, over the synod which deposed Abp. Arnulf of Reims (Schlockwerder, "Das Konzil zu St. Basle", Magdeburg, 1906). In 1049, Leo IX presided at a reformatory synod (Drehmann, "Papst Leo IX u. die Simonie", Leipzig, 1908). In 1115 a synod was held at which the cardinal legate Cuno of Praeneste excommunicated King Henry. In 1119 Calistus II convened a synod for the purpose of concluding peace with Henry V. There were present 15 archbishops, over 200 bishops, and as many abbots. In 1148 Eugene III was present at a synod against Gilbert de la Porée and the fanatic Eon de l'Estoile. In 1164 Alexander III presided at a synod which urged the crusade against Emperor Frederick I. In 1407 Abp. Guido III convened a synod to abolish the abuses that had crept into the Church of Reims during the Western Schism. In 1528 Abp. Robert III held a synod against Luther. In 1564 Cardinal Charles of Lorraine convened a reformatory synod to enforce the Tridentine decrees. In 1583 Cardinal Francis of Guise held a synod at which 27 reformatory decrees were enacted. After a lapse of almost three centuries Cardinal Gousset of Reims convoked a synod at Soissons in 1849; another, at Amiens in 1853; a third, at Reims in 1857. The acts of the last three synods are printed in "Collectio Lacensis", IV, 91-246.

## Sources

For the acts of the preceding and many other synods of minor importance, see GOUSSET, Actes de la province ecclesiastique de Reims (Reims, 1841); HEFELE, Conciliengesch.
