# William Reynolds

*Writer, priest and lecturer (1544-1594)*

(RAINOLDS, RAYNOLDS, REGINALDUS)

Born at Pinhorn near Exeter, about 1544; died at Antwerp, 24 August, 1594, the second son of Richard Rainolds, and elder brother of John Rainolds, one of the chief Anglican scholars engaged on the "Authorized Version" of the Bible. Educated at Winchester School, he became fellow of New College, Oxford (1560-1572). He was converted partly by the controversy between Jewel and Harding, and partly by the personal influence of Dr. Allen. In 1575 he made a public recantation in Rome, and two years later went to Douai to study for the priesthood. He removed with the other collegians from Douai to Reims in 1578 and was ordained priest at Châlons in April, 1580. He then remained at the college, lecturing on Scripture and Hebrew, and helping Gregory Martin in translating the Reims Testament. Some years before his death he had left the college to become chaplain to the Beguines at Antwerp. He translated several of the writings of Allen and Harding into Latin and wrote a "Refutation" of Whitaker's attack on the Reims version (Paris, 1583); "De justa reipublicæ christianæ in reges impios et hæreticos authoritate" (Paris, 1590), under the name of Rossæus; a treatise on the Blessed Sacrament (Antwerp, 1593); "Calvino-Turcismus" (Antwerp, 1597).

## Sources

KIRBY, *Annals of Winchester College* (London, 1892); FOSTER, *Alumni Ozonienses* (Oxford. 1891); *Douay Diaries* (London, 1878); WOOD, *Athenae Ozonienses* (London, 1813); PITTS, *De illustribus Angliae scriptoribus* (Paris, 1619); DODD. *Church History,* II (Brussels *vere* Wolverhampton, 1737-42); GILLOW in *Biog. Dict. Eng. Cath.,* s.v.; RIGG in *Dict. Nat. Biog.,* s.v. *Rainolds.*
