# Ribeirao Preto

*A suffragan see of the Archdiocese of Sao Paulo, Brazil*

(DE RIBERAO PRETO)

A suffragan see of the Archdiocese of São Paulo, Brazil, established 7 June, 1908, with a Catholic population of 500,000 souls. The first and present bishop, Rt. Rev. Alberto José Gonçalves, was born 20 July, 1859, elevated 5 December, 1908, and consecrated 29 April, 1909. The district of Ribeirão Preto is at present the most important one of the State of São Paulo, both on account of the richness of its soil and the great number of agricultural, industrial, and commercial establishments therein. Its principal product is coffee, the shipments of which are so considerable as to necessitate the constant running of an extraordinary number of trains.

The seat of the diocese is the city of Ribeirão Preto, situated on the shores of Ribeirão Preto and Ribeirão Retiro, 264 miles from the capital of the state. The municipality, created by the law of 1 April, 1889, is divided into four wards, viz.: Villa Tibeiro, Barracão, Morro do Cipó, and Republica. It is, like most of the interior towns of São Paulo, of modern construction. The city is lighted by electric light and has excellent sewer and water-supply systems. The streets are well laid, straight, and intersecting at right angles, with many parks and squares. The cathedral now nearing completion will be one of the finest buildings of its kind in Brazil. It is well provided with schools and colleges, prominent among which are those maintained by the Church.
