# John Gage Rokewode

*Director of the Society of Antiquaries (1786-1842)*

Born 13 Sept., 1786; died at Claughton Hall, Lancashire, 14 Oct., 1842. He was the fourth son of Sir Thomas Gage of Hengrave, and took the name Rokewode in 1838 when he succeeded to the Rokewode estates. He was educated at Stonyhurst, and having studied law under Charles Butler he was called to the bar, but never practiced, preferring to devote himself to antiquarian pursuits. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1818, and was director from 1829 till 1842. He also became a fellow of the Royal Society. In 1822 he published "The History and Antiquities of Hengrave in Suffolk" and in 1838 "The History and Antiquities of Suffolk". His edition of Jocelin de Brakelond's chronicle published by the Camden Society in 1840 furnished Carlyle with much of his materials for "Past and Present" (1843). Many papers by him appeared in "Archaeologia", many of these being republished as separate pamphlets, including the description of the Benedictionals of St. Æthelwold and of Robert of Jumièges; he also printed the genealogy of the Rokewode family with charters relating thereto in "Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica", II. He contributed to the "Orthodox Journal" and the "Catholic Gentleman's Magazine". Many of his manuscripts were sold after his death with his valuable library. The Society of Antiquaries possess a bust of him by R.C. Lucas. He died suddenly while out shooting.

## Sources

Orthodox Journal, XV, 276; COOPER in Dict. Nat. Biog. GILLOW, Bibl. Dict. Eng. Caths.
