# Diego Ruiz de Montoya

*Spanish theologian (1562-1632)*

Theologian, b. at Seville, 1562; d. there 15 March, 1632. He entered the Society of Jesus in 1572 and was professed 22 July 1592. He taught philosophy in Granada, moral theology for one year in Baeza, and theology for about twenty years in Cordova and Seville. For a time he was rector of the College of Cordova, and represented his province, Andalusia, at the Sixth General Congregation. The last years of his life were devoted to writing. His distinguishing characteristics seem to have been humility, a retiring disposition, and integrity. Notwithstanding the fact that the Duke of Lerma promised to obtain permission from Paul V to publish his manuscripts "De Auxiliis", if he furthered his plans, he declined to advise the citizens of Seville to pay a certain tribute. Fray Miguel de San José considers him a most finished theologian; Merlin a wise, subtle, prudent student and faithful interpreter of the Fathers, and Kleutgen and Menendez-Pelayo think that he combined positive historic theology with scholastic, in a manner not achieved by any of the theologians who preceded him. His published works are: "Doctrine Christiana", written by command of the Bishop of Cordova, published anonymously and several times reprinted; "Commentaria ac disputationes in primam partem D. Thomae"—(a) "De Trinitate" (Lyons, 1625), his principal treatise and one of the best on this subject; (b) "De praedestinatione ac reprobatione hominum et angelorum" (Lyons, 1628); (c) "De scientia, ideis, veritate ac vita Dei" (Paris, 1629); (d) "De voluntate Dei et propriis actibus ejus" (Lyons, 1630); (e) "De providentia" (Lyons, 1631); (f) "De nominibus Dei". These are rare and much sought editions. In manuscript preserved in various libraries: "De auxiliis", two volumes classified as very good by Father Vitelleschi. "De angelic"; "Commentarii in materiam de peccatis"; "Controversiae et quaestiones theologicae"; "De beneficiis parochialibus conferendis"; "De eliminandis e republica comoediis vulgaribus"; "De statu eorum, qui petunt dimissionem in Societate Jesu"; "De causis dimittendi a Societate Jesu".

## Sources

MUNOZ DE GALVEZ, Carta . . . sobre la muerte y virtudes del Padre Montoya. Uriarte says this was signed in Seville in 1632 and was written by Father Feliciano de Figuero (Catalogue. . .No. 3797). ANDRADE, Varones ilustres, VII (Bilbso, 1891), 162; MICHAEL A S. JOSEPH, Bibliogr. Crit. sacra et prof., IV (Madrid, 1742), 85; NICOLAS ANTONIO, Bibliotheca Hispana Nova, I (Matriti, 1793), 311; SOTWEL, Bibliot. scrip. societ. (Rome, 1676, 1774); HURTER, Nomenclator, I (Innsbruck, 1892), no. 265; SOMMERVOGEL, Bibliotheque, VII (1896), col. 323; Memorial del Colegio de Cordoba, I, cap. viii, p. iv, n. ii; GUILHERMY, Menologe: Espagne, I, 433.
