# Sámar and Leyte

*The names of two civil provinces in the Visayan group of the Philippines*

The names of two civil provinces in the Visayan group of the Philippines, which include the islands of Balicuatro, Batac, Biliran, Capul, Daram, Homonhon, Leyte (2722 sq. miles), Manicani, Panaon, Sámar (5031 sq. miles), and several smaller islands, and which make up the DIOCESE OF CALBAYOG (CALBAYOGANA), suffragan of Manila. The diocesan seat is at Calbayog, a city of 22,000 inhabitants on the western side of Sámar; the cathedral is dedicated to Sts. Peter and Paul. The first Jesuit missionaries reached Leyte and Sámar in 1595, the islands subsequently forming part of the Diocese of Cebú until erected into a separate diocese, 10 April, 1910. The first bishop is the Rt. Rev. Pablo Singzon de la Anunciacion, D.D., formerly Vicar-General of Cebú, consecrated in St. Francis's Church, Manila, 24 June, 1910. The Lazarist Fathers have charge of the diocesan seminary and college of St. Vincent de Paul at Calbayog. Besides training youths for the priesthood they give courses of primary instruction in seven grades, three commercial courses, a four years' high school course, and classical courses for the B. A. degree (Greek, Latin, English, Spanish, natural science, higher mathematics, and philosophy). There are 180 students. The Sisters of Charity have charge of the girls' academy, the College of the Miraculous Medal, at Calbayog, in which there are primary, secondary, and higher courses, together with lessons in drawing, painting, music, sewing, and embroidery.

## Statistics

Priests, secular, 45; regular, 22; Lazarist Fathers, 5; parishes on Sámar, 33, missions, 138; parishes on Leyte, 39, missions, 71; total parishes (including 25 small islands), 79; estimated population, 800,000, practically the whole of whom are devout and loyal Catholics.

## Sources

REDONDO, *Historia de la Diócesis de Cebú in Guia oficial de Filipinas* (1907).
