# Anton Sander

*Historian, b. at Antwerp, 1586; d. at Afflighem, Belgium, 10 Jan., 1664*

Historian, b. at Antwerp, 1586; d. at Afflighem, Belgium, 10 Jan., 1664. Having become master of philosophy at Douai in 1609, he studied theology for some years under Malderus at Louvain, and Estius at Douai, and was ordained priest at Ghent. For some years he was engaged in parochial duties, and combated the Anabaptist movement in Flanders with great zeal and success. In 1625 he became secretary and almoner of Cardinal Alphonsus de la Cueva, later becoming canon, and in 1654 penitentiary at Ypres. After three years, however, he resigned this office to devote himself entirely to scientific, and especially to historical studies. He soon found himself compelled to claim the hospitality of the Benedictine Abbey of Afflighem, since he had reduced himself to absolute poverty by the publication of numerous works. He combined high intellectual gifts with great zeal, and left behind forty-two printed, and almost as many unprinted, works. The most important are the following: "De scriptoribus Flandriae libri III" (Antwerp, 1624); "De Gandavensibus eruditionis fama claris" (Antwerp 1624), "De Brugensibus eruditionis fama claris libri II" (Antwerp, 1624); "Hagiologium Flandriae sive de sanctis eius provinciae liber unus" (Antwerp, 1625; 2nd ed., Lille, 1639). A general edition of these four works appeared under the title: "Flandria illustrata" (2 vols., Cologne, 1641-44; The Hague, 1726). Of his other works may be mentioned: "Elogia cardinalium sanctitate, doctrina et armis illustrium" (Louvain, 1625): "Gandavium sive rerum Gandavensium libri VI" (Brussels, 1627); "Bibliotheca belgica manuscripta" (2 parts, Lille, 1641-3); "Chorographia sacra Brabantiae sive celebrium in ea provincia ecclesiarum et coenobiorum descriptio, imaginibus aeneis illustrata" (Brussels, 1659; The Hague, 1726); this is his chief work.

## Sources

FOPPENS, Bibl. Belgica, I (Brussels, 1739), 87 sqq.; HURTER, Nomenclator.
