# St. Senan

*Sixth-century Irish missionary, bishop, and confessor. Was revered even in his earthly life for his sanctity, being visited by Sts. Ciaran and Brendan*

Bishop and confessor, b. at Magh Lacha, Kilrush, Co. Clare, c. 488; d. 1 March, 560, his parents being Erean and Comgella. His birth was prophetically announced by St. Patrick on his visit to the Hy Fidhgent (Co. Limerick), and as a boy he was placed under the guidance of a saintly abbot called Cassidan, finishing his studies under St. Naul) at Kilmanagh, Co. Kilkenny. He commenced his missionary career by founding a church near Enniscorthy, in 510 (or 512), and the parish is still known as Templeshannon (*Teampul Senain*). He then visited Menevia, Rome, and Tours, and returned to Ireland in 520. Having founded churches at Inniscarra (Co. Cork), at Inisluinghe, at Deer Island, Inismore, and Mutton Island, he finally settled at Iniscathay, or Scattery Island, Co. Clare. He was visited by St. Ciaran and St. Brendan, and other holy men, who had heard of his sanctity and miracles. Scattery Island became not only a famous abbey but the seat of a bishopric with St. Senan as its first bishop. This event may be dated as about the year 535 or 540, and St. Senan's jurisdiction extended over the existing Baronies of Moyarta and Clonderalaw in Thomond, the Barony of Connelo in Limerick, and a small portion of Kerry from the Feal to the Atlantic. The legend of "St. Senanus and the Lady", as told in Tom Moore's lyric, is founded on the fact that no woman was allowed to enter Scattery Island; not even St. Cannera was permitted to land there, yet St. Senan founded two convents for nuns, and was actually on a visit to one of them when he died. He was buried in the abbey church of Iniscathay on 8 March, on which day his feast is observed. The Diocese of Inniscathy continued till the year 1189, when it was suppressed. It was, however, restored by Pope Innocent VI, and continued as a separate see under Bishop Thomas (1358-68). In 1378 its possessions were divided, and the island remained a portion of Killaloe, being subsequently merged into the parish of Kilrush. One of the earliest references to the Round Tower of Inniscathay is in the Irish life of St. Senan.

## Sources

COLGAN, Acta Sanct. Hib. (LOUVAIN, 1645); ARCHDALL, Mon. Hib. (new ed., Dublin, 1873): O'HANLON, Lives of the Irish Saints, IV (Dublin, s. d.); FROST, Hist. of Co. Clare (Dublin 1893); BEGLEY, Diocese of Limerick (Dublin, 1906).
