# Vicariate Apostolic of Eastern Shan-tung

*This mission was separated in 1894 from Northern Shan-Tung and erected into a vicariate Apostolic*

This mission was separated in 1894 from Northern Shan-Tung and erected into a vicariate Apostolic. It includes the three civil Prefectures of Yen-Chu-Fu, Lai-Chu-Fu, and Teng-Chu-Fu. There are about 10,000,000 inhabitants. The climate is very healthy. On Nov., 1897, two German missionaries, Fathers Francis Xavier Nies and Richard Henle, were attacked and massacred in the village of Chang-Kia-Chwang. This double murder led to the occupation of Kiao-Chau on 14 Nov., 1897, by the German fleet. In 1899 the territory occupied by the German Government was separated from Eastern Shan-Tung and confided to the mission of Southern Shan-Tung. The Vicariate Apostolic of Eastern Shan-Tung is entrusted to the Franciscan Fathers. The actual vicar Apostolic is Rt. Rev. Mgr. Cæsarius Schang, titular Bishop of Vaga, b. 3 July, 1835, appointed 22 May, 1894. He resides at Che-Fu. In 1904 the mission had: 16 European Franciscan Fathers; 3 native priests; 9400 Catholics; 10,500 catechumens; and 145 churches and chapels. In 1909 there were: 17 European Franciscan Fathers; 2 European secular priests; 3 native priests; 9000 Catholics; 11,700 catechumens; 13 churches; 138 chapels; 350 stations; 1 seminary with 5 students; 1 preparatory seminary, with 27 students; 30 schools for boys, with 622 pupils; 24 schools for girls, with 435 pupils; 2 colleges for boys, with 140 students; 1 college for girls, with 25 students; 2 industrial schools, with 154 pupils; 3 hospitals; 3 orphanages, with 195 orphans; 30 sisters of the Franciscan Missionaries of Mary.

## Sources

*Missiones Catholicæ* (Rome, 1907).
