# Thomas Somerset

*Confessor, born about 1530; died in the Tower of London, 27 May, 1587; second son of Henry, second Earl of Worcester*

Confessor, born about 1530; died in the Tower of London, 27 May, 1587; second son of Henry, second Earl of Worcester. He was committed to the Fleet, 10 June, 1562, "for translating an oratyon out of Frenche, made by the Cardinall of Lorraine", Charles de Guise, Archbishop of Reims, "and putting the same without authority in prynte". On 27 June, 1562, he was summoned before the Lords of the Council at Greenwich, who expected "an humble submission, for wante whereof, and for that he seamed to go about to justifye his cause, he was returned to the Flete, there to remaine untill he" should "have better considered of himself". After an imprisonment of close on twenty years he was released on bail, 28 Feb., 1581-82, to attend to legal business in Monmouthshire. On 2 May, 1582, he was too ill to travel, and was permitted to remain at liberty till he should recover. By 22 October, 1585, he was in the Tower on a charge of high treason. Being possessed of properties in Gloucestershire and Monmouthshire, he paid the costs of his imprisonment, and his name therefore is not to be found in the Tower Bills.

## Sources

*Catholic Record Society's Publications,* I (London, 1905, etc.), 49; DASENT, *Acts of the Privy Council* (London, 1890-1907), VII, 108; XIII, 336, 407; *Calendar State Papers Domestic 1581-90* (London, 1865), 249, 278, 305; COLLINS, *Peerage,* I (London, 1779), 201.
