# Franz Seraph Streber

*Numismatist and nephew of Franz Ignaz von Streber, born at Deutenkofen, Lower Bavaria, 26 Feb., 1805; died at Munich, 21 Nov. 1864*

Numismatist and nephew of Franz Ignaz von Streber, born at Deutenkofen, Lower Bavaria, 26 Feb., 1805; died at Munich, 21 Nov. 1864. He first studied theology and philosophy, then archæology and numismatics, and wrote in 1830 as his dissertation for obtaining the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at Erlangen a paper on the genealogy of the Burgraves of Nuremberg. In 1854 he became a member of the Academy of Munich. In 1835 he was made professor of archæology at the University of Munich, of which he was twice rector. In 1827 he was made clerk, in 1830 assistant, and in 1841 curator of the royal cabinet of coins. He also worked on the numismatic collection of Vienna and prepared a critical catalogue of 18,000 Greek coins and a numismatico-iconographic lexicon with drawings of about 6000 Greek coins belonging to the Viennese and Munich collections. In 1834 he published the work "Numismata nonnulla græca", which corrected false and inexact designations of coins; this was crowned with a prize by the Academy of Paris as was also his important investigation concerning what are called the rainbow patina, which he was the first to recognize as Celtic (vol. IX of the papers of the Munich Academy). Further papers on Celtic, Greek, and medieval coins, also on archæology, mythology, and the history of art, appeared chiefly in the publications of the Munich Academy. He also drew up a "Promemoria" that is preserved among the records of the royal cabinet of coins, as to the expenses and the plan of a monumental work covering the entire field of Greek numismatics that was to take the place of the old work by Eckhel and be about one-half larger. Streber was also prominent in politics as a strong supporter of the ecclesiastico-conservative party. He founded the association for a constitutional monarchy and religious freedom, and wrote many political memorials at its request.

## Sources

*Transactions of the Academy of Munich,* I (1865), 2661 sq.; *Histor.-politische Blátter,* LV (1865), 85 sq.
