# Tabernacle Society

*Philadelphia, Pennsylvania*

Notre Dame Convent, Philadelphia; a society of persons affiliated with the Association of Perpetual Adoration and Work for Churches in Rome. The Philadelphia organization was begun by five graduates of the convent in 1866, who formed the first Sodality of the Children of Mary in that city, affiliated with the Roman Sodality, who resolved to do some work for the altar. On 1 Oct., 1878, Archbishop Wood had the society affiliated to the Association of Perpetual Adoration and Work for Poor Churches in Brussels. This association was transferred to Rome in 1879 and the Philadelphia organization was aggregated to it 8 Oct., 1881. There are now 22 societies in the United States thus aggregated with the arch-association. The Philadelphia Association is authorized to affiliate parishes, and these share in all the benefits. From the beginning until the present the Philadelphia Society has enrolled over 10,000 members. It now has over 1800 active members in and around the city, and many more throughout the country in affiliated parishes. It has the approbation of 92 archbishops and bishops. It has helped about 4600 parishes and missions in every part of the United States, and many foreign countries. It expends about $4000 a year for materials which are made up by the members without compensation. About 100 sacred vessels are given away each year, and these are all donated, generally as memorials of the dead or for some favour received. The association publishes its "Annals" three times a year: the January number contains the report for the previous year.

## Sources

Manual of Tabernacle Soc., and Annals of Association of Perpetual Adoration and Work for Poor Churches (Notre Dame Convent, Philadelphia).
