# Temiskaming

*The Vicariate Apostolic of Temiskaming, suffragan of Ottawa, Canada*

The Vicariate Apostolic of Temiskaming, suffragan of Ottawa, Canada, is bounded on the north by Hudson Bay and the Great Whale River; on the south by the height of land, or watershed, except in the Temiskaming district, where the southern boundary is 47° N. lat.; on the east by 72° W. long and on the west by 91° W long. It was erected on 22 Sept., 1908, by dividing the Diocese of Pembroke. Father de Bellefeuille, S.S., and Father Dupuy of Montreal, first preached the Gospel here in 1836. Annual visits were made to the Indians of the district, missions being held at the Hudson Bay Company's trading posts. The Oblates of Mary Immaculate were given charge in 1843. Father Laverlochère was the first of these zealous missionaries. They established a residence at Fort Temiskaming in 1863, but removed to Ville Marie in 1886. Lumbering succeeded the fur trade and was followed by agriculture, the fertile shores of Lake Temiskaming rapidly attracting settlers. Railway construction with the discovery of silver and gold (1903), advanced the Ontario section. The Catholic population of the vicariate is about 20,000, including some 5000 Indians. Haileybury, Ontario, is the residence of the first vicar Apostolic, the Right Rev. Elie-Anicet Latulipe. There are 17 parishes, 20 missions, and many stations, served by 21 secular priests, 4 Missionaries of the Sacred Heart (who have a college also), and 9 Oblates of Mary Immaculate. The Marist Brothers, the Sisters of the Assumption (novitiate at Haileybury), the Grey Nuns of the Cross, the Sisters of the Sacred Heart, the Sisters of Providence, and the Sisters of the Holy Family conduct four boarding-convents, two hospitals, and one industrial school and refuge for Indians, besides several parochial schools. The Rt. Rev. Elie-Anicet Latulipe, D.D., was born at St. Anicet, Province of Quebec, 3 Aug., 1859. Ordained on 30 May, 1885, he was successively curate at St. Henri, Montreal, chaplain at the convents of the Good Shepherd, Montreal, and St. Anne's, Lachine, rector of Pembroke Cathedral, and pastor of Haileybury. He was named Bishop of Catenna and first Vicar-Apostolic of Temiskaming on 1 Oct., 1908, and consecrated on 30 Nov., 1908.
