# Thomas of Jorz

*English theologian and cardinal (d. 1310)*

(Often but erroneously called JOYCE and frequently referred to as ANGLUS or ANGLICUS).

Theologian and cardinal, date of birth and circumstances of his education unknown; died at Grenoble, 13 December, 1310. He entered the Order of Preachers in England, and was remarkable for his piety, erudition, and executive ability. He was master of theology at Oxford, acted as prior of the Dominican convent there, and afterwards served as Provincial of the English Province for seven years (1296-1303). He stood in special favour with Edward, King of England, acting as his confessor and executing several commissions for him. While at Lyons on a commission for the king, 15 December, 1305, he was created Cardinal Priest of Santa Sabina by Clement V. This pope also appointed him legate to Henry VII, King of Germany, but in fulfilling the appointment he was taken sick and died. His body was afterwards transferred to Oxford and buried under the choir of the Dominican church. His writings are often confused with those of Thomas of Wales, O.P., also called Anglus or Anglicus. His most important work is "Commentaria in IV libros Sententiarum." The commentary of the first book (Venice, 1523) still enjoys popularity, and offers a concise and complete refutation of the attacks made by Scotus on the teachings of Saint Thomas.

## Sources

QUETIF-ECHARD, Script. ord. P., I (Paris, 1719), 508-10; TOURON, Hom. ill. Domin., I (Paris, 1743), 745-53; BALUZE, Vitae pap. Aven., I (Paris, 1693), 582-4; KINGSFORD in Dict. Nat. Biog., s.v. Jorz, LELONG, Bibl. sac., II (Paris, 1723), 799, 988; TANNER, Bibl. brit.-hib. (London, 1748), 749; HURTER, Nomenclator.
