# Uhtred

*An English Benedictine theologian and writer*

(Also spelled: *Uhtred* or *Owtred*), an English Benedictine theologian and writer, born at Boldon, North Durham, about 1315; died at Finchale Abbey, 24 Jan., 1396. He joined the Benedictines of Durham Abbey about 1332 and was sent to London in 1337. Three years later he entered Durham College, a house which the Durham Benedictines had established at Oxford for those of their members who pursued their studies at the University of Oxford. He was graduated there as licentiate in 1352 and as doctor in 1357. During the succeeding ten years, and even previously, he took part in numerous disputations at Oxford University, many of which were directed against members of the mendicant orders. It is on this account that Bale (loc. cit. below) wrongly designates him as a supporter of Wyclif. In 1367 he became prior of Finchale Abbey, a position to which he was appointed three other times, in 1379, 1386, and 1392. In 1368 and in 1381 he was subprior at Durham Abbey. Along with Wyclif he was one of the delegates sent by Edward III to the papal representatives at Bruges in 1374, with the purpose of reaching an agreement concerning the vexed question of canonical provision in England. In the same year he represented Durham Abbey at a council held by Edward, Prince of Wales, for the purpose of determining whether the king was obliged to recognize the papal suzerainty which had been granted to Innocent III by King John. On this occasion Uhtred defended the pope's right of overlordship, but, when on the following day the assembly cast its vote contrarily, he followed their example. Among his literary works, none of which have as yet been printed, are worthy of mention: "De substantialibus regulae monachalis", preserved in the Durham Cathedral Library; "Contra querelas Fratrum", written about 1390, extant in the British Museum; and a Latin translation of the "Ecclesiastical History" of Eusebius, which is also preserved in the British Museum.
