# Dominic Vallarsi

*Italian priest (1702-1771)*

An Italian priest, born at Verona, 13 November, 1702; died there, 14 August, 1771. He studied with the Jesuits at Verona and after his elevation to the priesthood occupied himself chiefly in archæological and Patristic studies. In his searches for manuscripts and other antiquities he was aided financially by the City of Verona and its bishop, as well as by Benedict XIV, who gave him a benefice in the Diocese of Vicenza and appointed him reviser for the Oriental languages at the Holy Office. He was also highly respected for his archæological learning by such men as Muratori, Zeno, Mazzuchelli, and others. His one fault was his great dogmatism in expressing h is opinions and his lack of appreciation of the learning of others. His chief work is an edition of St. Jerome; "S. Hieronymi opera omnia post monachorum e congregatione S. Mauri recensionem quibusdam ineditis monumentis aliisque lucubrationibus aucta, notis et observationibus illustrata," (11 vols., Verona, 1734-42; revised and enlarged, Venice, 1766-72, reprinted in P.L., XII-XXX). Though in many respects an improvement upon the Maurist edition by Martinay and Pouget (Paris, 1693-1706), it was still very imperfect. In the opinion of Reifferscheid ("Bibl. Patr. Lat. Italica", Vienna, 1865, p. 66), Vallarsi in many cases neglected to correct the text of former editions in accordance with the excellent manuscripts that were at his disposal. Vallarsi also assisted Scipio Maffei in his revision of the Maurist edition of St. Hilary (Verona, 1730) and brought out an incomplete edition of the works of Rufinus (Verona, 1745). The second volume, which was to contain the Latin translations of Rufinus, did not appear.
