# Hospice-Anthelme Verreau

*French-Canadian priest, educator, and historian (1828-1901)*

A French-Canadian priest, educator, and historian, b. at l'Islet, P.Q., 6 Sept., 1828, of Germain V. and Ursule Fournier; d. at Montreal in 1901. After terminating his classical course at the Quebec Seminary, he taught at Ste Thérèse College, and, in 1857, was appointed principal of the newly founded Jacques-Cartier Normal School, an office he held until his death. He was made a Lit.D. of Laval (1878) and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. In 1873 he was commissioned by the Quebec Government to investigate certain European archives for materials relating to Canadian history. Besides many contributions to the Historical Society of Montreal, of which he was the first president, and to the Royal Society, he published (1870-73) two volumes of memoirs concerning the invasion of Canada by the Americans. His chief publications are: "Notice sur la fondation de Montréal"; "Des commencements de l'église du Canada"; "Jacques-Cartier; Questions du calendrier civil et ecclésiastique; Questions de droit politique, de législation et d'usages maritimes". These works of patient research and erudition are written in a chaste, clear, and easy style. He elucidates some very obscure historical points regarding the true motives animating the founders of Ville- Marie. As an educator he was incomparable, ever striving to realize his lofty ideal of those who are called to train youth for life's duties. This he strove to obtain through love of God and country, by a firm and just discipline, whereby order was observed, study seriously pursued, application duly controlled, and Christian politeness inculcated.

## Sources

MORGAN, Bibliotheca canadensis (Toronto, 1898); CASGRAIN, Annuaire de l'Universite Laval (Quebec, 1902); DESROSIERS, Les Ecoles Normales de la Prov. De Quebec (Montreal, 1909).
