# The Name of Mary

*The Hebrew form of her name is Miryam*

The Blessed Virgin Mary is the mother of Jesus Christ, the mother of God.

The Hebrew form of her name is *miryam* denoting in the Old Testament only the sister of Moses. In 1 Chronicles 4:17, the Massoretic text applies the same name to a son of Jalon, but, as the Septuagint version transcribes this name as *Maron*, we must infer that the orthography of the Hebrew text has been altered by the transcribers. The same version renders *miryam* by *Marian*, a form analogous to the Syriac and Aramaic word *Maryam.* In the New Testament the name of the Virgin Mary is always *Mariam*, excepting in the Vatican Codex and the Codex Bezae followed by a few critics who read *Maria* in Luke 2:19. Possibly the Evangelists kept the archaic form of the name for the Blessed Virgin, so as to distinguish her from the other women who bore the same name. The Vulgate renders the name by Maria, both in the Old Testament and the New; Josephus (Ant. Jud., II, ix, 4) changes the name to *Mariamme*.

It is antecedently probable that God should have chosen for Mary a name suitable to her high dignity. What has been said about the form of the name *Mary* shows that for its meaning we must investigate the meaning of the Hebrew form *miryam*. Bardenhewer has published a most satisfactory monograph on the subject, in which he explains and discusses about seventy different meanings of the name *miryam* (Der Name Maria. Geschichte der Deutung desselben. Freiburg, 1895); we shall be able to give only an outline of his work. Fr. von Hummelauer (in Exod. et Levit., Paris, 1897, p. 161) mentions the possibility that *miryam* may be of Egyptian origin. Moses, Aaron, and their sister were born in Egypt; the name *Aaron* cannot be explained from the Hebrew; the daughter of Pharaoh imposed the name *Moses* on the child she had saved from the waters of the Nile; hence it is possible that their sister's name Mary was also of Egyptian origin. This seems to become even probable if we consider the fact that the name Mary was not borne by any woman in the Old Testament excepting the sister of Moses. But the question why was not the name Mary more common in the Old Testament, if it was of Hebrew origin, is answered by another question, why was the name Mary chosen by the parents of Our Blessed Lady and by a number of others mentioned in the New Testament, if the word was Egyptian? Though the meaning of Mary as derived from the Egyptian *Mery, Meryt* (cherished, beloved), is most suitable for an only daughter, such a derivation is only possible, or at best barely probable.

Most interpreters derive the name Mary from the Hebrew, considering it either as a compound word or as a simple. *Miryam* has been regarded as composed as a noun and a pronominal suffix, or of a noun and an adjective, or again of two nouns. Gesenius was the first to consider *miryam* as a compound of the noun *meri* and the pronominal suffix *am*; this word actually occurs in II Esd., ix, 17, meaning "their rebellion". But such an expression is not a suitable name for a young girl. Gesenius himself abandoned this explanation, but it was adopted by some of his followers, e.g. by J. Grimm (Das Leben Jesu; sec. edit., I, 414-431, Regensburg, 1890) and Schanz (Comment. uber d. Ev. d. hl. Matthäus, p. 78, Freiburg, 1879). One of the meanings assigned to the name Mary in Martianay's edition of St. Jerome's works (S. Hier. opp., t. II, Parisiis, 1699, 2°, cols. 109-170, 181-246, 245-270) is *pikra thalassa*, *bitter sea.* Owing to the corrupt condition in which St. Jerome found the "Onomastica" of Philo and of Origen, which he in a way re-edited, it is hard to say whether the interpretation "bitter sea" is really due to either of these two authorities; at any rate, it is based on the assumption that the name *miryam* is composed of the Hebrew words *mar* (bitter) and *yam* (sea). Since in Hebrew the adjective follows its substantive, the compound of the two words ought to read *yam mar*; and even if the inverse order of words be admitted as possible, we have at best *maryam*, not *miryam*. Those who consider *miryam* as a compound word usually explain it as consisting of two nouns: *mor* and *yam* (myrrh of the sea); *mari* (cf. Daniel 4:16) and *yam* (mistress of the sea); *mar* (cf. Isaiah 40:15) and *yam* (drop of the sea). But these and all similar derivations of the name Mary are philogically inadmissible, and of little use to the theologian. This is notably true of the explanation *photizousa autous*, enlightening them, whether it be based on the identification of *miryam* with *me'iram* (part. Hiphil of *'or* with pronominal suffix of 3 plur.), or with *mar'am* (part. Hiphil of *ra'ah* with pron. suffix of 3 plur.), or again with *mar'eya* (part. Hiphil of *raah* with Aramaic fem. termination *ya*; cf. Knabenbauer, Evang. sec. Matt., pars prior, Parisiis, 1892, p. 43).

Here a word has to be added concerning the explanation *stella maris*, star of the sea. It is more popular than any other interpretation of the name Mary, and is dated back to St. Jerome (De nomin. hebraic., de Exod., de Matth., P.L., XXIII, col, 789, 842). But the great Doctor of the Church knew Hebrew too well to translate the first syllable of the name *miryam* by star; in Isaiah 40:15, he renders the word *mar* by *stilla* (drop), not *stella* (star). A Bamberg manuscript dating from the end of the ninth century reads *stilla maris* instead of *stella maris.* Since Varro, Quintillian, and Aulus Gelliius testify that the Latin peasantry often substituted an e for an i, reading *vea* for *via*, *vella* for *villa*, *speca* for *spica*, etc., the substitution of *maris stella* for *maris stilla* is easily explained. Neither an appeal to the Egyptian Minur-juma (cf. Zeitschr. f. kathol. Theol., IV, 1880, p. 389) nor the suggestion that St. Jerome may have regarded *miryam* as a contracted form of *me'or yam* (cf. Schegg, Jacobus der Bruder des Herrn, Munchen, 1882, p. 56 Anm.) will account for his supposed interpretation *stella maris* (star of the sea) instead of *stilla maris* (a drop of the sea).

It was Hiller (Onomasticum sacrum, Tübingen, 1706, pp. 170, 173, 876) who first gave a philological explanation of *miryam* as a simple word. The termination *am* is according to this writer a mere formative affix intensifying or amplifying the meaning of the noun. But practically *miryam* had been considered as a simple noun long before Hiller. Philo (De somn., II, 20; ed. Mangey, II, 677) is said to have explained the word as meaning *elpis* (hope), deriving the word either from *ra'ah* (to see, to expect?) or from *morash* (hope); but as Philo can hardly have seriously believed in such a hazardous derivation, he probably presented Mary the sister of Moses as a mere symbol of hope without maintaining that her very name meant hope. In Rabbinic literature *miryam* is explained as meaning *merum* (bitterness; cf. J. Levy, Neuhebraisches und chaldaisches Wörterbuch uber die Talmudim und Midraschim, Leipzig, 1876-89, s.v. *merum*); but such a meaning of the word is historically improbable, and the derivation of *miryam* from *marar* grammatically inadmissible. Other meanings assigned to *miryam* viewed as a simple word are: *bitter one, great sorrow* (from *marar* or *marah*; cf. Simonis, Onomasticum Veteris Testamenti, Halae Magdeburgicae, 1741, p. 360; Onom. Novi Test., ibid., 1762, p. 106); *rebellion* (from *meri*; cf. Gesenius, Thesaur. philol. critic. ling. hebr. et chald. Beter. Testamenti, edit. altera, Lipsiae, 1835-38, II, p. 819b); *healed one* (cf. Schäfer, Die Gottesmutter in der hl. Schrift, Münster, 1887, pp. 135-144); *fat one, well nourished one* (from *mara*; cf. Schegg, Evangelium nach Matthäus, Bd. I, München, 1856, p. 419; id., Jacobus der Bruder des Herrn, München, 1882, p. 56; Furst, Hebr. und chald. Hanwörterb. über d. alte Test., Leipzig, 1857-1861, s.v. *miryam*); *mistress* (from *mari*; cf. v. Haneberg, Geschichte d. biblisch. Offenbarung, 4th edit., Regensburg, 1876, p. 604); *strong one, ruling one* (from *marah*; cf. Bisping, Erklärung d. Evang. nach Matth., Münster, 1867, p. 42); *gracious or charming one* (from *ra'am* which word does not have this meaning in the Old Testament; cf. v. Haneberg, 1, c.); *myrrh* (from *mor*, though it does not appear how this word can be identified with *miryam*; cf. Knabenbauer, Evang. sec. Matth., pars prior, Parisiis, 1892, p. 44); *exalted one* (from *rum*; cf. Caninius, De locis S. Scripturae hebraicis comment., Antverpiae, 1600, pp. 63-64).

In 1906 Zorrell advanced another explanation of the name Mary, based on its derivation from the Egyptian *mer* or *mar*, to love, and the Hebrew Divine name *Yam* or *Yahweh* (Zeitschrift für katholische Theologie, 1906, pp. 356 sqq.). Thus explained the name denotes "one loving Yahweh" or "one beloved by Yahweh". We have already pointed out the difficulty implied in an Egyptian origin of the name Mary. Probably it is safer to adhere to Bardenhewer's conclusions (l. c., pp. 154 sq.): *Mariam* and *Maria* are the later forms of the Hebrew *miryam*; *miryam* is not a compound word consisting of two nouns, or a noun and an adjective, or a noun and a pronominal suffix, but it is a simple though derivative noun; the noun is not formed by means of a prefix (*m*), but by the addition of a suffix (*am*). Presupposing these principles, the name *miryam* may be derived either from *marah*, to be rebellious, or from *mara*, to be well nourished. Etymology does not decide which of these derivations is to be preferred; but it is hardly probable that the name of a young girl should be connected with the idea of rebellion, while Orientals consider the idea of being well nourished as synonymous with beauty and bodily perfection, so that they would be apt to give their daughters a name derived from *mara* Mary means therefore *The beautiful* or *The perfect one.*
