# Ven. William Ward

*Ward, whose real name was William Webster, was over 40 when he began his studies for the priesthood. He labored for 30 years in England, 20 of which were spent in prison. He was martyred in 1641 at the age of about 80, for the crime of being a priest*

(Real name WEBSTER).

Born at Thornby in Westmoreland, about 1560; martyred at Tyburn, 26 July, 1641. He was over forty when he went to Douay to study for the priesthood but no details have been preserved of his earlier life. He arrived there on 18 September, 1604; received the minor orders on 16 December, 1605; the subdiaconate on 26 October, 1607; the diaconate on 31 May, 1608; and the priesthood on the following day. On 14 October he started for England, but was driven on to the shores of Scotland, arrested, and imprisoned for three years. On obtaining his liberty he came to England where he laboured for thirty years, twenty of which he spent in various prisons as a confessor for the Faith. He was zealous and fiery temperament, severe with himself and others, and especially devoted to hearing confessions. Though he had the reputation of being a very exacting director his earnestness drew to him many penitents. So mortified was his personal life and so secret his numerous charities that he was even accused of avarice. He was in London when Parliament issued the proclamation of 7 April, 1641, banishing all priests under pain of death, but refused to retire, and on 15 July was arrested in the house of his nephew. Six days later he was brought to trial at the Old Bailey and was condemned on 23 July. He suffered on the feast of St. Anne, to whom he ever had a great devotion. An oil portrait, painted shortly after the martyrdom from memory or possibly from an earlier sketch, is preserved at St. Edmund's College, Old Hall.

## Sources

Third Douay Diary in Cath. Rec. Soc., X (London, 1911); CHALLONER, Memoirs of Missionary Priests (London, 1741-2), using contemporary account written by one of Ward's penitents.
