# St. Wulfram

*Late seventh-century missionary and bishop*

(VULFRAMNUS.)

Bishop of Sens, missionary in Frisi, born at Milly near Fontainebleau, probably during the reign of Clovis II (638-56); died 20 March, before 704, in which year a translation of his body took place (Duchesne, "Fastes épiscopaux de l'ancienne Gaule", II, Paris, 1900, 413). His father Fulbert stood high in the esteem of Dagobert I and Clovis II. Wulfram received a good education, and was ordained priest. He intended to spend a secluded life but was called to the Court of Theodoric III of Neustria and from there was elevated to the episcopacy of Sens, 684 (690, 692). He was present at an assembly of bishops in 693 at Valenciennes. Two years later he resigned and retired to the Abbey of Fontanelle. During the second journey of St. Boniface to Rome Wulfram is said to have preached in Frisia. He tried to convert Radbod, but not succeeding he returned to Fontanelle. Some authorities record another and longer stay in Frisia, but, as neither Bede nor Alcuin mention his missionary labour there, it is barely possible. The relics of the saint were brought to Notre Dame at Abbeville in 1058. His feast is celebrated 20 March.

## Sources

Acta SS., III March, 143; MABILLON, Acta SS. O. S. B., III, i, 340; BENNETT in Dict. Christ. Biog., s.v. Wulframnus, St.; DELETOILLE, Eloge de St. Wulfran (Paris, 1808); GLAISTER, Life and times of St. Wulfram, bishop and missionary (London, 1878); LA VIEILLE, ed. SAUVAGE, Abrege de la vie et miracles de St. Wulfran (Rouen, 1876); LEFRANC, L'authenticite des religues de St. Wulfran. . . reponse a. . .Sauvage (Paris, 1890).
