# János Zádori

*Ecclesiastical writer, born at Katloez, County of Neutra, Hungary (1831-1887)*

(DREXLER).

Ecclesiastical writer, born at Katloez, County of Neutra, Hungary, 6 March, 1831; died at Gran, 30 Dec., 1887. He studied at the Pazmaneum of the University of Vienna. His favourite branches were modern languages, literature, and the natural sciences. Ordained priest in Dec., 1854, he was chaplain at Balassa-Gyarmat for ten years, and from 1864 to the end of his life taught dogmatic theology at the archiepiscopal seminary at Gran. He was a member of the metropolitan chapter and a domestic prelate of Leo XIII. He declined an appointment to the See of Neusohl. Thirty-eight of his works have appeared in print, among them some of a devotional character and memorial sermons, one on Count Stephen Széchényi. His principal works are: "A társadolom alapoloci" (The fundamental principles of human society), Budapest, 1864, in which he develops the ideas of Lacordaire and others against modern errors; "Utivázlatok Oloszorszagbol" (Sketches of Italy), Budapest, 1867; "A rimai katakombák" (The Roman catacombs), with 19 plates, Budapest, 1868; "Spanyol út" (Journey through Spain), Budapest, 1868; "IX Pius pápa élete" (Life of Pius IX), Gran, 1869; "A Jesus Szive ajtatossázanak története, mivolta hittani alapja" (The devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, its nature, history, and theological foundation), Gran, 1878; "Szus Mária szeplötelen sivének" (The veneration of the Immaculate Heart of Mary), Gran, 1879; "Szent Peter ket levele" (The two letters of St. Peter), Budapest, 1881, for which he received great praise from the theological faculty at Gran; "Syntagma theologiae fundamentalis", Gran, 1882 (see "Theol. Quartalschrift", Tübingen, 1887, 691, and "Zeitschrift für kath. Theol.", Innsbruck, 1884, 584). From 1870-86 he edited the theological magazine "Uj magyar Sion" (New Hungarian Sion).

## Sources

WURZBACH, Biogr. Lex., LIX (Vienna, 1890), 84; HURTER, Nomencl.
