# Queen's Daughters

*American religious and charitable society, organized to supplement the work done by the members of the Conference of St. Vincent de Paul*

(DAUGHTERS OF THE QUEEN OF HEAVEN, FILIÆ REGINÆ COELI)

A religious and charitable society founded at St. Louis, Mo., 5 Dec., 1889, by Miss Mary Hoxsey. It was organized to supplement the work done for the poor in their homes by the members of the Conference of St. Vincent de Paul. The project received the approbation and encouragement of the Very Rev. P.P. Brady in whose parish it was inaugurated, and several years later the papal sanction and blessing were accorded (17 July, 1894). The society has since spread to numerous parishes of the United States and there are now thirty-five associations affiliated to those at St. Louis. The constitution of the society provides that it shall be governed by a general council composed of subordinate councils and associations. Five or more associations in a diocese have the right of forming a subordinate council with its own bylaws and officers. The society was incorporated on 6 Jan., 1902. The Queen's Daughters visit the poor in their homes and afford them spiritual and material aid. They endeavour to influence those who neglect their religious duties or the religious training of their children, they teach Christian doctrine in mission Sunday-schools, and assist in preparing persons for baptism, and in providing suitable clothing for the first Communion of children whose parents are unable to make such provision. Their organizations include sewing-guilds, cooking-schools, boarding-homes for women and girls, sanctuary guilds and altar societies. At their Saturday industrial schools for children the children of the poor are taught to sew and be self-helpful. Here also they are brought in contact with the members of the Guardian Angel Bands, the children of well-to-do parents, who are taught to make garments for the poor and to be generally helpful and sympathetic to their poorer companions. The usual work in connexion with juvenile courts is done according to instructions provided by court officials. The members of several religious congregations are honorary members of the association. Representative of these are the White Sisters of the Nazareth Home, Providence, R.I., who maintain a day nursery and visit the sick poor in their homes and to whom the society is pledged to contribute a specified sum monthly. The patroness of the society is the Blessed Virgin; and its motto "Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam".
