# Fajardo Diego de Saavedra

*Statesman and author, b. at Algezares, Murcia, Spain, in 1584; d. at Madrid in 1648*

Statesman and author, b. at Algezares, Murcia, Spain, in 1584; d. at Madrid in 1648. He made his studies at the University of Salamanca where he received his degree in law. After having been the secretary of Cardinal Borgia, Spanish ambassador at Rome, he succeeded him in that position. Saavedra enjoyed the full confidence of Philip IV, conducting the political and diplomatic affairs of the latter during the course of thirty-five years in Italy, Germany, and Switzerland. His qualities and abilities as a statesman are shown as well in his works as in his deeds. His "Idea de un principe. . .representado en cien empresas" (Madrid, 1670), translation by J.E. (London, 1827), embodied in a pleasing garb of humor. Other secondary works of Saavedra are: "Corona gótica" (1670), "Locuras de Europa" and "politica y razón de estado del Rey Católico D. Fernando". A complete edition of all his works appeared at Madrid in 1853. Saavedra is not only one of the foremost prose writers of Spain but is also one of the greatest glories of Spanish diplomacy.

## Sources

TICKNOR, History of Spanish Literature, III (New York, 1854), 185; MENENDEZ Y PELAYO, Historia de las ideas esteticas en Espana, III (Madrid, 1888); DE PIUBUSQUE, Histoire comparee des litterateures espagnole et francaise (Paris, 1854); CORTINES Y MURUBE, Ideas juridicas de Saavedra Fajardo (Madrid, 1908): This latter work is prefaced by a very good account of Saavedra's life and diplomatic missions.
