# Part 1 — FIRST VESPERS — Christ, a priest forever according to the order of Melchizadek, offered bread and wine.

"Cantus contra, *Gloria tibi Trinitas*, de Trinitate"

Contra, *Totus orbis*, de sancto Thoma.

Contra, *Pudore bono*, de sancto Nicholao.

Contra, *Iuste et sancte vivendo*, de sancto Nicholao.

Contra, *Innocenter puerilia iura*, de sancto Nicholao.

The Lord Jesus, on the night he was handed over, took bread, and, after he had given thanks, broke it and said, "This is my body which is for you. Do this in remembrance of me.

Contra, *Virgo flagelatur*, de sancta Catharina.

Contra, *Pange lingua gloriosi praelium certaminis*, in Passione domini.

Word made flesh took bread and blessed it,

by a word turned it to flesh.

Wine became Christ's blood the same way,

even though it can't be sensed.

All a heart sincere requires

is to rest on faith alone.
So this sacrament most awesome

let us venerate bowed down.

Let the olden Law's observance

yield to new and perfect rites.

Let our faith supply completely

where our senses cannot cope.

To the Father, to the Son be

jubilation, shouts of praise,

honor to our mighty Savior,

acclamations, endless thanks.

To the Spirit from both flowing

be like honor without end.

℣. You gave them bread from heaven.

℟. Containing every sweet delight.

Contra, *O Christi pietas*, de sancto Nicholao.

God, in this wonderful sacrament you left us a memorial of your Passion. Enable us, we ask, so to venerate the sacred mysteries of your Body and Blood, that we may always fell the fruit of your redemption in us. You live and reign with God the Father in the unity of the Holy Spirit, forever and ever. Amen.

[contra:]
