# Part 3 — DAY 3, SUNDAY

"It is the Spirit that gives life; the flesh is of no use."

We have said that the Lord disposed, when we eat his flesh and drink his blood, that we should dwell in him and he in us. We dwell in him, since we are his members. He dwells in us, since we are his temple. We are his members because we are bound in unity with him. But unity is from love, and love is from the Spirit. It is the Spirit that gives life, because it makes living members. But the Spirit makes only those members living which it finds in a body that the Spirit himself animates. As for the spirit that is in you, man, by which you realize that you are a man, how can it give life to a member that it finds separated from your flesh? By this spirit, I mean your soul. Your soul gives life only to the members which are in your flesh. Take one of them away, it will not be animated by your soul, because it is not joined to the unity of your body. This was said so that we may love unity and fear separation. For a Christian should not fear anything except to be separated from the body of Christ. For if he is separated from the body of Christ, he is not his member. If he is not his member, he is not animated by his Spirit. "Anyone who does not have the Spirit of Christ," says the Apostle, "does not belong to him." So "the Spirit gives life; the flesh is of no use. The words I spoke to you are spirit and life" —All this is to be spiritually understood. Do you understand it spiritually? The Spirit and life exist, but they are not yours if you do not understand them spiritually and do not know how to venerate them with faith.

"There are some of you who do not believe." Therefore they do notunderstand, because they do not believe. For the Prophet [Isaiah 7:9] said, "Unless you believe, you will not understand. By faith we are joined to him, by understanding we are given life. Let us have him first by faith, so that afterwards we may have life through understanding.

"After this many of his disciples went back and no longer walked with him." They went back not after Christ, but after Satan. They went back cut off from the body of Christ, and they did not return to him, because they were not faithfully fixed in his body. Such people are not few, but many.

Let us listen what he said to the few who remained. Jesus said to the twelve: "Do you also wish to go away?" Judas did not go away, but why he remained will appear later, when he is discovered. Peter answered for all of them, one for many, unity for universality. "Simon Peter said to him, 'Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life'." See how Peter, by the Lord's gift put in him by the Spirit, understood. How else, but because he believed in the words of eternal life? You have eternal life in the ministry of your body and blood. We believe and we know. We believed so that we might know. For if we wanted to know first and then believe, we could neither know nor believe. What do we believe and whatdo we know?—That "you are the Christ, the Son of the living God," that is, because you are eternal life, and in your flesh and blood you only give what you are.

Is it figuratively or really that this mystical sacrament of the chalice takes place? The Truth said: "My flesh is really food, and my blood is really drink." Otherwise, what is so great about this?—"The bread that I will give is my flesh for the life of he world"—unless it is really flesh? But because it is not right to chew Christ with your teeth, he decided that this bread and wine, by [priestly] ministry should be really and in power created into his flesh and blood by the consecration of the Holy Spirit, and to be mystically sacrificed every day for the life of the world. In this way, just as the Holy Spirit created flesh from the Virgin without intercourse, so by the same Spirit, from the substance of bread and wine mystically the same body of Christ is consecrated. The body of Chriwst is both reality and figure. The figure is what is outwardly sensed. Within the Catholic Church, nothing so surpassing in goodness, nothing so remote from evil is enacted by the priest than in the ministry of the body of Christ, because this is done not by the merit of the priest consecrating, but it is enacted by the word of the Creator and by the power of the Holy Spirit. For if it were done by the merit of the priest, it would in no way belong to Christ. But now, just as Chris is the one who baptizes, so it is he who through the Holy Spirit turns [the bread] into flesh, and the wine becomes blood. So the priest says: "Command this to be offered by the hands of your holy angel to your sublime altar in the presence of your divine majessty." Why does he ask it to be brought into the light, if not show that this is donw by that priesthood [of Christ]. "Therefore that offering so blest", by which we are blessed, "registered", by which people are registered in heaven, "ratified", through which we are inscribed in the innards of Christ, "reasonable", by which we are stripped of bestial attitudes, "acceptable", by which, though we are displeasing to ourselves, we become acceptable to his only Son. There is nothing more reasonable, because, having taken on the likeness of his death in baptism, here we also take on the likeness of his flesh and blood. In that way the real [body and blood] is not diminished in the sacrament, and the pagans have no opportunity to ridicule us for drinking the blood of a murdered man. We must believe that the sacraments are effected by the words of Christ. As the elements were first created by his power, so also by his word they are transformed into something better. All the rest that the priest says or the choir cleric sings is nothing more than praise, thanksgiving and petitions, along with the prayers of the faithful.

The Lord did everything he wanted in heaven and on earth, and because he decided, it was made. So, although the figure of bread and wine are seen, it is to be believed as nothing other than the flesh and blood of Christ. So Truth itself said to the disciples: "This is my flesh forthe life of the world." And, to speak with greater wonder, it is none other than was was born of Mary, suffered on the cross and rose from the tomb. It is the very same flesh, and therefore it is Christ's flesh wich is offered to this day for the life of the world, and when it is worthily received, eternal life is procured. The bread the we receive in mystery means that bread which is was formed by the hand of the Holy Spirit in the womb of the Virgin, and was cooked by the fire of the passion on the altar of the cross. For the bread of angels has become the food of men. So he said: "I am the living bread which came down from heaven," and again: "The bread that I will give is my flesh for the life of the world."

Daily communion I neither praise nor blame, but I exhort all to receive every Sunday. But if the mind is set on sin, it will be dragged down by receiving the Eucharist rather than purified. Therefore, although someone is remorseful for sin, if his will is turned away from sin, and he satisfies for it by tears and prayers, trusting in the Lord's mercy, he may approach the Eucharist with confidence and security. But I am speaking of someone who is not guilty of mortal sins.

Some say that you should not receive the Eucharist every day, others say you should. Let everyone do what he piously believes should be done. Zachaeus and the Centurion had no quarrel and neither claimed to be better, when Zachaeus joyfully welcomed the Lord into his house, while the Centurion said: "Lord I am not worthy that you come under my roof." Both were honoring the Savior, although not in the same way. Both were miserable sinners; both received mercy. In this regard it is true that in each person's mouth the manna tastes different according to the state of his will.

If every time Christ's blood is shed it is shed for the remission of sins, then I mus always receive it, so that my sins may always be forgiven. Because I always sin I always must have the medicine.

Those who live disolutely in the Church and do not refrain from receiving Communion, thinking that the are cleansed by such a communion, should learn that it contributes nothing to their purification, as the prophet [Jeremiah 11:15] said: "What is my beloved doing in my house with her many crimes? Can sacred flesh take your evil away?" And the Apostle said: "Let each man prove himself, and then eat of that bread and drink of that chalice."

It is not a bread that enters the body, but it is the bread of eternal life, which supports the substance of the soul. It is a "daily bread". Receive every day what does you good every day. And live in a way to merit receiving it every day.

Holy things can be bad for the evil. They bring salvation to the good, but condemnation to the evil. So the Apostle said: "He who eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks to his own condemnation." It is not that the thing is bad, but because an evil person evilly receiveswhat is good. For the morsel that the lord gave Judas was not bad. The doctor gave medicine, but because an unworthy person received it, he received it to his own doom.

Let the dispensor [of the Eucharist] not forbid those "who prosper on earth" [Ps 22:29 (Vulgate)] from eating, but warn officials to fear.

When the Lord gave the morsel to Judas, it was not by receiving a bad thing, but a good thing evilly, that he opened himself to the devel. So anyone receiving the body of Christ unworthily, it does not mean that this body isbad because he is bad, or that he receives nothing because he he does not receive it for his salvation. For the body and blood of the Lord are nonetheless in those of whom the Apostle said, "Who eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks to his own condemnation." But how should Christ be eaten? —In the way that he said: "Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood" worthily "dwells in me and I in him." Ajnd if he receives the sacrament unworthily, he earns a great torment.

Because the Lord was about to take from their sight the body he had assumed and take it to heaven, it was necessary that he should consecreate for us the sacrament of his body and blood on the day of the Lord's Supper, so that he might be always worshipd through the mystery that was once offered to redeem us. Because this redemption goes on every day uninterrupted for our salvation, there had also to be a perpetual sacrifice of redemption. That perpetual victim had to live in our memory and always be present in grace, the truely unique and perfect offering, recognized by faith, not by its outward visible characteristics, but by interior affection. So heavenly authority rightly confirms it, since: "My flesh is real food and amy blood is real drink." So let all unbelieving doubt go away, because the author of the gift is himself the witness of its reality. For the invisible priest converts visible creatures into the substance of his body and blood by the secret power of his word when he said: "Take and eat. This is my body." And in the second blessing: "Take and drink. This is my blood." Therefore, just as at the Lord's command suddenly from nothing came the heights of the heavens, the depths of the oceans, the vastness of the earth, so he acts with like power in the sacraments, where power commands and results obediently follow.

You, who are reborn in Christ, ask yourself how many benefits worthy of celebration the power of God's blessing produces, and how you should not think it new and impossible that earthly and mortal things are converted into the substance of Christ. Before you were alien to life, gone far from mercy and the way of salvation, inwardly dead and in exile. Then, when you were initiated into Christ's laws and made new by saving ministry, you jumped into the body of the Church not by seeing but by believing. From a son of perdition, you merited by a hidden purity to be an adoptive son of God. Visibly you stayed the same, but you became greater than yourself invisibly, without any growth in quantity. Although you were one and the same person, you became very much another person by the processes of faith. Outwardly nothing was added, but inwardly everything was changed. Thus man becomes a son of Christ, and Christ is formed in the mind of man. Therefore, without bodily sensation, your past filth was put aside, and suddenly you put on a new dignity. God cured in you what was wounded, drained what was infected, washed what was stained. All that happened to you you could not see, but you could feel. In the same way, when you go up to the reverend altar to be satisfied with spiritual food, look at the sacred body and blood of your God, honor and admire it, put your mind on it, receive it with your heart's hand, and most of all receive it totally in your mind, as your inner man drinks it in.

In Christ an oblation was once offered which work eternal salvation. What do we say, then? Don't we offer it every day? But that is in memory of his death, and it is one offering, not many. How can it be one and not many? —Because Christ was offered once. This [Eucharistic] sacrifice is an example, the very same and always the very same as that. Therefore it is a single sacrifice. Otherwise it would be said, since it is offered in many places, that there are many Christs. —No way, but there is one Christ everywherre, fully existing here and fully there. Just as what is offered everywhere is one body, and not many bodies, so there is one sacrifice. The high-priest is he who offered an oblaction that cleans us. We offer even now the original oblation, which cannot be terminated. What we do is in commemoration of what was done. "Do this," he said, "in memory of me."
