# Part 1 — DAY 1, FRIDAY

Regarding God's works in the whole world, you have read that "He spoke, and they were made," "He commanded and they were created." Therefore could not the Word, which could make something from nothing, also change what exists into something else? Nothing less can be conceded than to admit that he can change things into new natures. What, then? If we use his arguments, let us use his examples, and consider the truth of the Incarnation. Was the Lord Jesus not aware of the natural process when he was to be born of Mary? If we go by the order of nature, a woman has a child by intercourse with a man. So it is clear that the Virgin had her child outside the order of nature. And what we effect [in the Mass] is the body that came from the Virgin. Why should you look for the order of nature in [the presence of] Christ's body, when the same Lord Jesus was born of the Virgin apart from the order of nature? Yes, it is the true flesh of Christ which was crucified and was buried. Therefore it is really the sacrament of his body. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself cries out: "This is my body." Before the heavenly words of blessing it was a different thing. After the consecration it is designated his body. He said [the same] with regard to his blood. Before the consecration it was called one thing; after the consecration is is designated his body. You say "Amen. This is true." What you speak, may you also feel in your heart.

Bread was handled on the altar before the sacramental words. At the consecration, from bread there became the flesh of Christ. But how could it belong to bread to be the body of Christ? The consecration happens, therefore, by which words and whose pronouncement?—Those of the Lord Jesus. All the rest that is said [in Mass] is praise offered to God, or petitions made for the people, for kings, and for others. But when the sacrament is effected, the priest does not use his own words, but the words of Christ. Therefore the pronouncement of Christ effects this sacrament. What is the pronouncement of Christ?—That by which everything was made: heaven, earth, the seas. So you see how efficacious is the pronouncement of Christ. Therefore, if there is so much power in the pronouncement of Christ, that something could come to exist from nothing, how much more efficacious is it in converting something that previously existed into something else? And so, what was bread before the consecration is right away the body of Christ after the consecration, because the pronouncement of Christ changes a creature, and thus from bread there becomes the body of Christ. And the wine mixed with water in the chalice becomes by the consecration the blood of the heavenly Word.

But you may object: "I do not see the appearance of blood, but only something like it." Just as you took on the likeness of his death, so you drink the blood of Christ in its likeness, so that there would be no revulsion at the blood, while the price of redemption is at work. You have learned that you receive the body of Christ. Do you want to know by which heavenly words it is consecrated? Here are the words. The priest says, "Let this offering for us be certified, reasonable, acceptable—which is a figure of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ—who, before he suffered, blessed it, broke it, and gave it to his Apostles and his disciples, saying: 'Take this, all of you, and eat from it. This is my body, which will be broken for many.' When supper was ended, likewise he took the chalice, looked up to heaven, to you, holy Father, almighty and eternal God, and giving thanks blessed it and gave it to his disciples saying: 'Take this and drink from it, all of you. For this is my blood.'" All the preceding are the words of the Evangelist, up to "Take this body" or "this blood". So it is Christ who says: "Take and drink from it, all of you. For this is my blood." Observe the details. It is said, "Before he suffered, he took bread in his sacred hands." Before it was consecrated it was bread. And before the words of Christ, the chalice was full of wine and water. But when the words of Christ took effect, then it became the blood which redeems the people. Therefore see how powerful is the pronouncment of Christ to convert it wholly. Then Jesus himself testifies that we receive his body and his blood, and we have no right to doubt his trustworthiness and testimony.

Christ is the bread of which he himself said: "And the bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the world." He determines how it is bread, not only according to the Word by which everything lives, but according to the flesh he took for the life of the world. For when human flesh that was dead by sin, when united to flesh that is pure, and incorporated and made one with it, lives by its spirit, as the body lives by its own spirit. But whoever does not belong to the body of Christ, does not live by the spirit of Christ.

The body and blood of Christ, we say, is that which was taken from the fruits of the earth and consecrated by a mystical prayer, and which we rightly receive it for spiritual salvation, in memory of the Lord's passion. When it is brought to that visible shape by human hands, it is sanctified to become such a great sacrament only by the invisible operation of the Holy Spirit, since God accomplishes all that happens in that act through bodily motions.

This is the sacrament of holy respect, and is the sign of unity and the body of charity. Whoever wishes to live should approach and believe, and he will be incorporated. He wants this food and drink to mean the society of his body and its members, which is the society of the Church in the predestined.

What we say, and what we try to ratify in every way, is that the sacrifice of the Church is made of and consists of two things: the visible appearance of the elements, and the invisible presence of the flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. There is the sacrament, and there is the reality of the sacrament, which is the body of Christ. This can be likened to the way the person of Christ consists and is made up of God and man, since Christ is true God and true man, since everything really contains withing itself the nature and reality of what it is made of. The sacrifice of the Church is made of two things, the sacrament and the reality of the sacrament, which is the body of Christ. It is therefore a sacrament and the reality of the sacrament, namely, the body of Christ. It is his flesh covered in the form of bread that we receive in the sacrament, and his blood which we drink under the appearance and taste of wine. "Flesh" is the sacrament of his flesh, and "blood" the sacrament of his blood [by direct signification]. By the flesh and blood—both invisible and spiritually intelligible—there is signified [by concomitance] the visible and palpable body of our Lord Jesus Christ, full of divine majesty and the grace of every virtue. Therefore, just as the heavenly bread which is truly the flesh of Christ is called in its own way the body of Christ, since it is really the sacrament of the body of Christ, that is, his body which was visibly, palpably and mortally placed on the cross, it is also called the very immolation of his flesh—which happens by the hands of the priest—as well as the suffering, death and crucifixion of Christ, not in its real actualization, but in the mystery of what is signified. In the same [dual] way the sacrament of faith, by which we mean baptism, is to be believed.
