# Part 2 — DAY 2, SATURDAY

This offering is repeated every day, even though Christ suffered only once in the flesh, and by one and the same deadly suffering saved the world, and after rising from death to life was no longer subject to death. This God the Father provided for in his wisdom, since it was needed for many reasons. First, because we sin every day, at least by committing those sins without which, in our mortal infirmity, we cannot live; for, although all sins are forgiven by baptism, the weakness of sin still remains in the flesh. Thus the Psalmist says: "Bless the Lord, my soul, who forgives all your iniquities, who heals all your infirmities." Therefore, because we fall every day, everyday Christ is mystically immolated for us, and the passion of Christ is handed on in mystery. In this way, he who overcame death once and for all, relieves us of our recurring sins through these sacraments of his body and blood. Thus we pray: "Forgive us our trespasses," because if we said that we do not have any sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us. This mystery is also repeated to commemorate the suffering of Christ, as he said: "As often as you do this, you do it in my memory. Therefore, as often as you take this bread and drink this chalice, you announce the death of the Lord until he comes. In the meantime, the death of Christ for the life if the world must be constantly proclaimed, so that they may learn by what love he loved his own, who was willing to die for them. We all owe it to him to love him in return, because he loved us first when we were hell's children, so that we might love him once we are freed from death.

We signify that we have been set free by the death of the Lord when, in memory of this, we eat his flesh and blood which were offered for us.

How it is given, and by what manner that bread is eaten, you do not know. Nevertheless, "unless you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, you do not have life in you." Yes, he was not speaking to corpses, but to living people. Then, to prevent them from misunderstanding and arguing about this life, he added: "He who eads my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life." Therefore whoever does not eat that bread or drink that blood does not have eternal life. It is true that people who live in this world, who do not belong to his body by faith, can have temporal life, but eternal life, which is promised to the saints, never.

Those who receive this food and drink of his carnally, without spiritual understanding in faith, might think that by receiving it they will never suffer bodily death. To correct this misunderstanding, after saying "He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life," he added right away: "And I will raise him up on the last day," so that such a person in the meantime may have in spirit that eternal rest which receives he spirits of the saints. And as for the body, he will not be cheated of his eternal life in the resurrection of he dead on the last day.

"My flesh," he says, "is really food, and my blood is really drink." Since people expect food and drink to relieve them of hunger and thirst, the only food and drink that offer this are those that make their consumers immortal and incorruptible. And that is the company of the saints, where there will be perfect peace and full and perfect unity. Therefore, as men of God before us understood, our Lord Jesus Christ presented his body and blood in things that are assembled in a unity. For bread is made from many grains, and wine is made from many clusters of grapes.

Finally he explains how what he had spoken about happens, and what it is to eat his body and drink his blood. "He who eads my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me and I in him. Therefore to eat that food and drink that blood is to dwell in Christ and to have him dwell in us. And thus he who does not dwell in Christ and does not have Christ dwelling in him certainly does not eat his flesh spiritually, even though carnally and visibly he bites with his teeth the sacramens of the body and blood of Christ. Rather, he eats and drinks to his own judgment the sacrament of so great a reality, who presumes to approach Christ's sacraments unclean, which no one worthily receives unles he is clean. Of such it is said: "Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God."

"As the living Father sent me," he said, "and I live because of the Father, so he who eats me will live because of me." For the Son who is born equal does not become better by participating in the Father, in the way that we become better by participating in him as children through our unity with his body and blood, which that eating and drinking signify. Therefore we live by him when we eat him, that is, when we receive him, te eternal life which we do not have of ourselves. Being sent by the Father, he lives because of him, since he emptied himself, made obedient unto the sign of the cross. "As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so he who eats me will live because of me. Regarding his words, "And I live because of the Father," he might ask us, "Why can I refer my life to him as someone greater? —Because of the state of emptiness in which he sent me. And why can someone live because of me? —Because he shares my life by eating me. Therefore in my state of humilitation I live because of the Father, and the righteous person lives because of me." He is not talking about that nature by which he is always equal to the Father, but about that in which he was made less than the Father. Of this he said above: "As the Father has life in himself, so he gave the Son [the prerogative of] having life in himself," that is, he begot a son having live in himself.

The is the bread which came down from heaven, for us to eat and live, because we cannot have eternal life from nothing. He says, "Not as your fathers ate and are dead. He hwo eats this bread will live forever." In saying that they are dead, he means that they do not live forever. For even those who eat Christ certainly will undergo temporal death, but they will live forever, because Christ is the sign of eternal life.

"He who eats and drinks"—that is, if he dwells in and is indwelled in, if he occupies and is occupied. He taught and admonished us by mystical words that we should be in his body and members under him as head, eating his flesh and not abandoning his unity. But many who were present did not understand and were scandalized. When the heard this they only thought of flesh, and that is what they were. But the Apostle says the truth: Being of a carnal mind is death. But the Lords told us to eat and attune our minds to his flesh. Attuning one's mind to the flesh is death, but in his flesh he says there is eternal life. Therefore we need not understand flesh according to the flesh, as he says in these words:

"Many, when they heard this,—and he is not talking about enemies, but of disciples—said: 'This is a hard saying. Who can listen to it?" If disciples considered that discourse hard, what about enemies? And yet it had to be said in a way that people would not understand. The secret of God should make people attentive, not hostile.
