# Part 5

The Father in Christ, and Christ in us make us one with them. If Christ truly assumed the flesh of our body, and Christ is truly a man, we also truly receive the flesh of his body under a mystery, and in this way we become one with him, because the Father is in him and he in us. How is the unity of will asserted, when its natural property through the sacrament is a perfect sacrament of unity? —These things cannot be discussed with a worldly way of understanding, nor should a perverse meaning that is alien and impious be extorted from the heavenly words in violent and imprudent preaching. When we say anything about the natural reality of Christ in us and this unity but what we have said and learned from him, we are talking stupidly and impiously.

No room has been left for ambiguity about the reality of the flesh and blood. For by the Lord himself's declaration and our faith, it is really flesh and really blood. And when these are eaten and drunk they cause us to be in Christ and Christ in us. He himself therefore is in us through his flesh. That we are in him through the sacrament of communion in his flesh and blood, he himself bears witness, saying: "You will see me, because I live and you will life, because I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you." If he had meant only a union of wills, as heretics assert, why did he describe this ultimate unity in terms of certain steps and order? —It was because he is in the Father by nature of his divinity, but we are in him through his bodily birth, and he is in us through the mystery of the sacraments. This perfect unity shows how he is a mediator, since we dwell in him, while he dwells in the Father. And while dwelling in the Father, he dwells in us. And thus we progress to unity, because while he is in us naturally according to his [human] birth, we also are naturally in him, as he is naturally always in us.

That this unity is naturally in us, he bears witness: "He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me and I in him. No one can be in him unless he is in that person—as he has assumed the human nature of the one who receives him. "As the living Father has sent me," he says, "and I live through the Father, so he who eats my flesh will live through me." The very way that he lives through the Father, we live through his flesh. His flesh, then, is the cause of our life. The fact that we have Christ dwelling in us through his flesh means that we will live through him in the same way that he lives through the Father. If, then, we naturally live through him on the level of the flesh, that is, by having the nature of his flesh, does he not also have the Father in him on the level of the spirit, since he lives through the Father? The body of Christ which is received from the altar is a figure, in so far as bread and wine are seen outwardly; but it is a reality, inwardly believed as the real body and blood of Christ.
