# Part 7

Because the Lord suffered for us, he left us his blood and body in this sacrament, in which he also included ourselves. For we have become his body, and by his mercy we become what we receive. Remember that you did not exist and you were then created and carried to the Lord's threshing floor and were threshed by the work of the oxen, that is those who proclaim the Gospel. When you were brought as catechumens, you were kept in the barn. You gave your names, and underwent grinding by fasting and exorcisms. Then you came to the water, were sprinkled and became the Lord's bread. See what you have received, and how one you have become. So all of you be one, loving one another by holding onto one faith, one hope and an undivided love. When heretics receive this sacrament, they receive evidence against themselves, because they pursue division, while that bread indicates unity. So wine started out in many clusters before it became one. It was wine in its initial stage, but became a chalice drink after going through the wine press. Likewise, after those fasts, labors, humility and contrition, you came in the name of the Lord to the chalice of Christ. There you are at table, and are with us in the chalice. For we receive this together, we drink it together, because we live together.

So our Lord Jesus Christ marked us out, he wanted us to belong to him, and he consecrated the mystery of our peace and unity at the table. Anyone who receives the mystery of unity and does not observe the bond of peace is not receiving the mystery for himself, but is receiving evidence against himself. None of the faithful should have any doubt that he becomes a partaker of the Lord's body and blood when he becomes a member of Christ by baptism. Nor can he be excluded from the society of that bread and chalice, even if before he can eat that bread and drink from that chalice he leaves this world. That is because he is established in the unity of Christ's body. He is not deprived of his share in the benefit of that sacrament when he has in himself what that sacrament signifies.

Those who eat and drink Christ, eat and drink life. To eat it is to be restored, to drink it is to live. What is visibly received in the sacrament is really spiritually eaten and drunk.

Christ is eaten, and when eaten he lives, because he rose after being killed. When we eat him, we do not divide him into parts, although the sacrament is divided. The faithful know that when they eat the flesh of Christ, each has his own portion. Christ is eaten in portions in the sacrament, but remains totally integral in heaven. He is eaten in portions in the sacrament, and he remains totally integral in your heart. for he was toally with the Father when he came into the Virgin. He filled her without leaving the Father. He came into flesh so that we could eat him, but he will ever remain integral with the Father where he feeds the angels.

The Lord invited his servants and prepared himself as their food. Who would dare eat his lord? And yet he said: "He who eats me lives because of me." When he is eaten, life is eaten. He is not killed to be eaten, but he gives life to the dead. When he is eaten, he restores, but he suffers no loss.

So, brothers, let us not be afraid that by eating that bread we may finish it and afterwards not find what to eat.

What is seen is the chalice and the bread, which our eyes inform us of. But the demand of informed faith is that the bread is the body of Christ, and the chalis is his blood. These are called sacraments because in them one thing is seen, another understood. What is seen has a bodily appearance, what is understood has spiritual fruit.

No sacrifice can be greater than the body and blood of Christ, and no oblation can have greater value, but this one exceeds them all. It is to be offered to the Lord with a pure conscience, received with a pure mind, and venerated by all. And because it is of greater value, it should be given greater worship and reverence.

The body of the Lord has a triple destination: A portion of the offering is dropped into the chalice, designating the body of Christ which is risen, a portion eaten, representing him still walking on earth, and a portion remaining on the altar until the end of the Mass, designating the body in the tomb, because the bodies of the saints will be in tombs until the end of the world.

When the host is broken, and the blood is poured from the chalice into the mouths of the faithful, this signifies the slaughtering of the Lord's body on the cross and the shedding of blood from his side.

The bread and the chalice becomes a mystic [sacrament] for us not by nature nor by any sort of blessing, but by a definite formula. Christ is in that sacrament. Whoever eats this body receives forgiveness of sins.

In that mystical distribution of spiritual nourishment, what is asked for and what is received is that we who partake of the powerful heavenly food may pass into his flesh, who became flesh like us. The nourishment of his blood is also a refreshing nourishment. For as the flesh of Christ is really food, so is his blood really drink. About the same body it was said: "My flesh is really food, and my blood is really drink." Eagles surround this body, flying with spiritual wings. Se we eat the same body of Christ, so that we can become partakers of eternal life.

In the appearances of bread and wine, which we see, we honor invisible things, that is, his flesh and blood. We do not regard these two species the same as we did before the consecration, since with faith we acknowledge that before the consecration they were bread and wine which nature formed, but after consecration they are really the flesh and blood of Christ which the blessing has consecrated.

Maybe you will say: "How can they be real flesh and real blood, when I see no resemblance to flesh and blood? —First of all I spoke to you about the pronouncement of Christ, which acts with power to change and convert the identity and characteristics of nature. Then, when the disciples would not accept Christ's words and, upon hearing that he was going to give them his flesh to eat and his blood to drink, went away, only Peter spoke up: "You have the words of eternal life, and how can I go away from you?" To prevent more from talking like the other disciples and to remove the horror of drinking blood while maintaining the Redemer's grace, he offered you this sacrament under a [different] likeness, but you really the glory and power of his nature, as he said: "I am the living bread which came down from heaven.

Christ gave his body and blood to be consumed under a different appearance for three reasons: First that we may have the merit of faith, which is about things that are not seen, because faith has no merit where human reason offers evidence. Secondly, Christ left us his flesh and blood in a mystery so that the soul may not be horrified at what it sees, because we do not eat raw flesh or drink blood, much less chew Christ with our teeth. Thirdly this was to prevent the Christian religion from being ridiculed by unbelievers.

There is nothing more reasonable than to receive a likeness of his blood, so that the reality may not be absent, and that pagans may not deride us for drinking the blood of a killed man.

But why is Christ received under two species, when he is a single total substantance? —This is to show that he took on a complete human nature, so that he may redeem it completely. Bread points to the flesh, and wine to the soul, because wine activates the blood, where physicians say is the seat of the soul. The sacrament is celebrated under two species to show us that Christ took on both a soul and flesh and that he liberated both. What we receive is good for the protection of body and soul, because the flesh of Christ is for the salvation of the body, while his blood is offered for our soul. This Moses indicated long ago, when he said: "The flesh is offered for your body, the blood for your soul." But what is useful for both is received under each species, because under each species the whole Christ is received.

Moreover, the visible species is a sacrament of a double thing, because it signifies and bears an express likeness of each thing. For just as bread restores and sustains the body more than other food, and wine gladdens and inebriates man, so the flesh of Christ spiritually restores and permeates the inner man more than other graces.

So this sacrament is very well called "Eucharist", that is, "good grace", because in this sacrament there is not only a growth of virtue and grace, but he is wholly received who is the fount and origin of all grace.

This sacrament also bears the likeness of the mystical reality which is the unity of the faithful, because as bread is made from many grains and wine from many grapes flows together, so Church unity is made up of many believing persons. So the Apostle says: "We, though many, are one loaf and one body." The Church is called one loaf and one body because, as one loaf is composed of many grains, and one body from many members, so the Church is made up of many believers brought together by the bond of love.

To believe in Jesus Christ is to consume bread and wine. He who believes eats. He is invisibly penetrated, because he is invisibly reborn. And the one who eats the flesh of Christ and drinks his blood has eternal life. For by participating in the Son by unity with his body and blood, the man who eats lives. He does not receive him only by way of sacrament, which even the evil do, but by participating in his spirit, so that he dwells in the body of the Lord as a member and is nourished by his spirit, as he keeps his commandment. The unjust person cannot approach the invisible altar of God, but only he who comes to it justified. Only the one who here discerns his conscience as right will find life there.

Every individual receives Christ the Lord, and Christ is totally in each portion. He is not diminished by being given to many people, but he offers himself whole to each one.

Wherever there is a part of the body, the whole is there. The same holds for the body of the Lord as does for the manna, which prefigured it. Of the manna it is said: "Anyone who collected a lot did not have more, and anyone who collected a little did not have less."

That was given to the ancient fathers after crossing the Red Sea, where the Egyptians were drowned and the Hebrews liberated. So also this heavenly manna can only be given to those who have bee reborn. That bodily bread led the ancient people through the desert to the promised land. This heavenly manna lifts the faithful who are going through the desert of this world to heaven. So it is rightly called "viaticum", because it restores us on the way (via) and leads us to our fatherland.
