# Lecture 1-0 — Prooemium — INTRODUCTION BY SAINT THOMAS — Subject matter of this book — and its relation to the subject matter of natural science in general

1. As the Philosopher says in *Physics* I, "We judge that we know a thing when we know the first causes and the first. principles down to the elements." Plainly from this the Philosopher shows that in sciences there is an orderly process, a procedure from first causes and principles to the proximate causes, which are the elements constituting the essence of a thing. And this is reasonable: For the method pursued in sciences is a work of reason, whose prerogative it is to establish order; wherefore, in every work of reason is found some order according to which one goes from one thing to another. And this shows up not only in the practical reason, which considers things that we make, but in the speculative reason as well, which considers things made by some other source.

2. The process from prior to subsequent is found in the act of the practical reason with respect to a fourfold order: first, according to the order of apprehension, inasmuch as an artisan first apprehends the form of a house absolutely and then realizes it in matter; secondly, according to the order of intention, inasmuch as an artisan intends to complete the house and for that purpose does whatever he does to the parts of the house; thirdly, according to the order of combining, inasmuch as he first trims the stones and then joins them into one wall; fourthly, according to the order of supporting the edifice, inasmuch as the artisan first lays the foundation, upon which the other parts of the house are supported.

In like manner, a fourfold order is found in the consideration of speculative reason. First, because there is a process from the general to the less general.. And this order corresponds to the first order which we have called "the order of apprehension," for universals are considered according to an absolute form, but particulars by applying form to matter, as the Philosopher in *On the Heavens* says, that the word "heaven" signifies a form, and "this heaven" signifies a form in matter.

The second order is that according to which one goes from the whole to the parts. And this corresponds to "the order of intention," inasmuch as, namely, the whole is considered prior to the parts, not just any parts but parts which are according to matter and which are of the individual — as in the case of a semi-circle, in the definition of which "circle" is used (for it is "half a circle") and of an acute angle, in the definition of which "right angle" is used (for an acute angle is an angle "less than a right angle"). To be divided in that manner is incidental to a circle and to a right angle; hence, neither is a part of the species of a circle or right angle. For parts of this sort [i.e. parts of the species] are prior in consideration to the whole and are used in the definition of the whole, as are flesh and bones in the definition of man, as is said in *Metaphysics* VII.

The third order is that according to which one goes from the simple to the combined, inasmuch as composites are known in terms of the simple, as through their principles. And this order is compared to the third order, which is the "order of combining." But the fourth order is the one that calls for the principal parts to be considered first, as are the heart and liver before the arteries and blood. And this corresponds in the practical order to that order according to which the foundation is laid first.

This fourfold order is also considered in the procedure of natural science. For, first of all, things common to nature are determined in the book of the *Physics*, in which mobile being is treated insofar as it is mobile. Hence what remains in the other books of natural science is to apply these common things to their proper subjects. The subject of motion, however, is a magnitude and body, because nothing is moved except what is quantified.

Now it is in bodies that the three other orders are considered: in one way, insofar as the entire corporeal universe is prior in consideration to its parts; in another way, insofar as simple bodies are considered before the mixed; thirdly, insofar as, among the simple bodies, the first must be considered first, i.e., the heavenly body, through which all the others are sustained. And these three are treated in this book, which the Greeks entitle *On the Heavens*. For in this book are treated certain things that pertain to the entire universe, as is plain in Book I; and things that pertain to the heavenly body, as is plain in Book II; and things that pertain to the simple bodies, as is plain in Books III-IV. Consequently, it is with good reason that this book is first in order after the book of the *Physics*. For this reason the first topic of discussion in the very beginning of this book is body, to which must be applied all that was set forth about motion in the *Physics*.

Because diverse things are treated in this book, there was among the early expositors of Aristotle a question about the subject of this book. For Alexander believed that the subject principally treated herein is the universe. Hence, since "the heavens" is subject to a threefold meaning — for sometimes it refers to the outermost sphere, sometimes to the whole body moved circularly, and sometimes to the entire universe — he asserts that this book is entitled *On the Heavens* as though meaning *On the Universe* or *On the World*. In asserting this he assumes that the Philosopher is here determining certain matters pertaining to the entire universe, for example, that it is finite, that it is unique, and things of this sort.

On the other hand, it seems to some that the main subject handled in this book is the heavenly body which is moved circularly, for which reason it is entitled *On the Heavens*. Other bodies, however, are discussed therein consequentially, insofar as they are contained by the heavens and influenced by them, as Iamblichus said; or only incidentally, insofar as a knowledge of other bodies is assumed in order to explain what is being said of the heavens, as Syrianus says. But this does not seem probable, for after the Philosopher has finished his discussion of the heavens in Book II, he treats in Books III and IV of the other simple bodies as though they were his main subject. Now the Philosopher is not wont to assign a principal part in some science to things that are brought up only incidentally.

Therefore it seemed to others, as Simplicius said, that the intention of Aristotle in this book is to determine about simple bodies inasmuch as they share in the common notion of simple body; and because among simple bodies. The chief is the heavens, on which the others depend, the entire book gets its name from the heavens. And, so he says, it makes no difference that in this book things pertaining to the whole universe are considered, for the conditions in question belong to the universe insofar as they belong to the heavenly body, i.e., to be finite and eternal, and so on. But if the principal intention of the Philosopher were to determine about the universe or the world, then he would have had to extend his consideration to all the parts of the world, even down to plants and animals, as Plato does in the Timaeus.

But the same argument could be used against Simplicius, because if Aristotle in this book intended to treat principally of the simple bodies, then in this book he would have had to mention everything that pertains to the simple bodies, whereas he discusses only what pertains to their lightness and heaviness, while he treats the other aspects in the book, *On Generation*.

5. Accordingly, the opinion of Alexander appears more reasonable, i.e., that the subject of this book is the universe itself, which is called "the heavens" or "the world," and that determination is made concerning simple bodies in this book accordingly as they are parts of the universe. Now, the corporeal universe is composed of its parts according to an order of position [situs]; consequently this book determines only concerning those parts of the universe that primarily and per se have position in the universe, namely, the simple bodies. That is why the four elements are not dealt with in this book from the aspect of their being hot or cold or something of that sort, but only with respect to their heaviness and lightness, from which their position in the universe is determined. Other parts of the universe, such as stones, plants and animals, have a determined place [situs] in the universe not according to what they are in themselves but according to the simple bodies; consequently, they are not treated in this book. And this agrees with what is usually said among the Latins, that this book discusses body that is mobile with respect to position or place, such motion being common to all the parts of the universe.
