# Lecture 1-7 — Lecture 7: — The heavenly body is not subject to growth and decrease, or to alteration.

35 Again, that which is subject to increase increases upon contact with a kindred body, which is resolved into its matter. But there is nothing out of which this body can have been generated.

36 And if it is exempt from increase and diminution, the same reasoning leads us to suppose that it is also unalterable. For alteration is movement in respect of quality; and qualitative states and dispositions, such as health and disease, do not come into being without changes of properties. But all natural bodies which change their properties we see to be subject without exception to increase and diminution. This is the case, for instance, with the bodies of animals and their parts and with vegetable bodies, and similarly also with those of the elements. And so, if the body which moves with a circular motion cannot admit of increase or diminution, it is reasonable to suppose that it is also unalterable. The reasons why the primary body is eternal and not subject to increase or diminution, but unaging and unalterable and unmodified, will be clear from what has been said to any one who believes in our assumptions.

37 Our theory seems to confirm experience and to be confirmed by it. For all men have some conception of the nature of the gods, and all who believe in the existence of gods at all, whether barbarian or Greek, agree in allotting the highest place to the deity, surely because they suppose that immortal is linked with immortal and regard any other supposition as inconceivable. If then there is, as there certainly is, anything divine, what we have just said about the primary bodily substance was well said.

38 The mere evidence of the senses is enough to convince us of this, at least with human certainty. For in the whole range of time past, so far as our inherited records reach, no change appears to have taken place either in the whole scheme of the outermost heaven or in any of its proper parts.

39 The common name, too, which has been handed down from our distant ancestors even to our own day, seems to show that they conceived of it in the fashion which we have been expressing. The same ideas, one must believe, recur in men's minds not once or twice but again and again. And so, implying that the primary body is something else beyond earth, fire, air, and water, they gave the highest place a name of its own, aither, derived from the fact that it 'runs always' for an eternity of time. Anaxagoras, however, scandalously misuses this name, taking aither as equivalent to fire.

After showing that the fifth body is not subject to generation and corruption, the Philosopher here shows that it is not subject to increase and diminution [35] and uses this argument: Every augmentable body is, with respect to something, subject to generation and corruption. To explain this, he proposes that every augmentable body is increased by the addition of something connatural that comes to it. This, indeed, while being first unlike, has become like by being resolved into its proper matter which, doffing its previous form, has assumed the form of the body to be increased — as bread, after being resolved into matter, receives the form of flesh, and thus, through being added to pre-existing flesh, produces increase. Hence wherever there is growth there must be generation and corruption into something. But there is nothing from which a heavenly body can be generated, as has been shown. Therefore it cannot be augmentable or decreasable.

72. Then at [36] he shows that it is not subject to alteration. Now it might seem to someone that an easy way to remove alteration from the heavenly body would be by removing contrariety, for just as generation occurs from contraries, so too, does alteration. But it should be observed that Aristotle removed contrariety from the fifth body by removing from it contrariety of motion. Alteration, however, seems to occur not only according to the contrariety to which contrary local motions correspond, namely, heavy and light and whatever results from them, but also according to other contraries which do not pertain to this, for example, according to black and white. Accordingly, he uses another way, based on increase.

And he says that it is for the same reason that we estimate a heavenly body not to be alterable and not to be augmentable or perishable. For alteration is a motion affecting quality, as has been said in *Physics* V. But alteration, as was shown in *Physics* VII, properly takes place according to the third species of quality, which is "passion and passible quality": for although "habit and disposition" pertain to [the first species of] the genus of quality, they are not produced without a change made according to the passions, just as health and languor result from a change of cold and hot, moist and dry. Now all natural bodies that are changed with respect to passion or passible quality seem as a consequence to have growth and decrease, as is clear from the bodies of animals and their parts and even of plants, in which growth properly exists. The same applies also to the elements, which rarefy and condense with respect to a change in hot and cold, from which results a change into larger or smaller quantity which is in a sense the same as being increased and decreased. Thus it is plain that if a body which is moved circularly is not subject to increase or decrease it is not subject to alteration.

Finally, in summary he concludes that it is plain from the foregoing — if anyone wants to assent to the previous demonstrations without wantonly contradicting — that the first body, which, namely, is moved with the first and perfect motion, i.e., circular motion, is sempiternal (as not being subject to generation and corruption), that it undergoes neither increase nor decrease, and that it is not subject to aging or alteration or passion.

73. Nevertheless objections can be leveled against this argument of Aristotle on two counts. First of all against the conclusion. For it seems to be false that a heavenly body is not altered, for it is plainly evident that the moon is illumined by the sun and obscured by the shadow of the earth.

But it must be said that alteration is of two kinds. One is passive and according to it things are so added that something else is cast off, as, when something is altered from hot to cold, it loses heat and receives coldness. It is that kind of alteration, which takes place according to passions, that the Philosopher is here excluding from heavenly body. But there is another kind of alteration which is perfecting, which occurs insofar as something is perfected by something else without loss to the former — this is the kind of alteration that the Philosopher in *On the Soul* II posits even in a sense power. Such an alteration nothing prevents from being in heavenly bodies, some of which receive virtues from others according to conjunctions and various aspects, but without any of them losing their own virtue.

74. The second objection is directed against the procedure of his argument: for it does not seem to be true that whatever is altered receives increase and decrease. For these result from the addition of something that is converted into the substance of what is increased, as is said in the book *On Generation* and in *On the Soul* II, and as was said above. Now the motion of increase does not exist except in animals and plants, for things that rarefy and condense are not increased by the addition of anything, as was proved in *Physics* V. Consequently, it seems unsuitable for Aristotle here to attribute the motion of increase not only to animals and plants and their parts, but to the elements as well.

But it should be said that Aristotle is here speaking of increase in the sense of any motion by which something proceeds to greater quantity. For he has not yet perfectly explained the nature of the motion of increase and it is his custom, before he has shown the true view, to use common opinions. But the force of his proof is not impeded by his having excluded increase from a heavenly body by excluding addition of a body changed into what is increased: for just as anything increased by addition is not utterly free of generation and corruption, so, too, what is increased by rarefaction.

However it is to be noted that in this proof he makes mention of *Physica* l bodies advisedly, because in mathematical bodies increase can occur without alteration — for example, a square grows by adding to it a gnomon, but it is not altered, as is said in the Predicaments; conversely, a thing can be altered without being increased, as when a triangle is made equal to a square.

75. Then at [37] he manifests the proposition through signs. And he says that both reason and things that appear to be probable seem to support one another on this point. And he gives three signs. The first of which is taken from the general opinion of men, who posit many gods or one God, whom the other separated substances serve. All who believe thus, whether Greeks or barbarians, assign the highest place, namely, the heavenly, to God, namely, all those who believe there are divine beings. But they assign the heavens to the divine substances as though adapting an immortal place to immortal and divine beings. In this way God's habitation in the heavens is understood as appropriate according to likeness, that is, that among all other bodies this body more closely approaches to a likeness to spiritual and divine substances. For it is impossible for the habitation of the heavens to be assigned to God for any other reason, as though He should need a bodily place by which He is comprehended. If therefore divine beings are to be posited, and since, indeed, they certainly must, the consequence is that the statements made about the first bodily substance, namely, the heavenly body, were well made, namely, that the heavenly body is ungenerated and unalterable.

Although men suppose that temples are the place of God, they do not suppose this from God's viewpoint but from that of the worshippers, who must worship Him in some place. That is why perishable temples are proportioned to perishable men, but the heavens to the divine imperishability.

76. The second sign he gives at [38] and it is taken from long experience. And he says that what has been proved by reason and common opinion occurs, i.e., follows, sufficiently — i.e., not absolutely but to the extent of human faith, i.e., so far as men can testify to what they have seen for a short time and from afar. For according to the tradition which astronomers have passed on concerning their observations of the dispositions and motions of heavenly bodies, in the whole time past there does not seem to have been any change affecting either the entire heavens or any of its own parts. Now this would not be, if the heaven were generable or perishable — for things subject to generation and corruption arrive at their perfect state little by little and step by step, and then gradually depart from that state, and this could not have been concealed in the heavens for such a long time, if they were naturally subject to generation and corruption.

However, this is not necessary but probable. For the more lasting something. is, the greater the time required for its change to be noted, just as change in a man is not noticed in two or three years, as it is in a dog or other animals having a shorter life-span. Consequently someone could say that, even though the heavens are naturally corruptible, nevertheless they are so lasting that the whole extent of human memory is not sufficient to observe their change.

77. The third sign is given at [39] and is based on a name given by the ancients, which endures to the present, and which gives us to understand that they thought the heaven to be imperishable just as we do. And lest anyone object that some before their time thought the heavens were subject to generation and corruption, he adds that true opinions are revived according to diverse times not once or twice but infinitely, supposing that time is infinite. For the studies of truth are destroyed by various changes occurring in these lower things, but because the minds of men are naturally inclined to truth, then when obstacles are removed, studies are renewed and men at last arrive at the true opinions which previously flourished, but false opinions need not be revived.

Consequently the ancients, supposing that the first body, namely, the heaven, to be of a nature different from the four elements, named the highest place of the world the "aether," thus applying to it a name based on the fact that it always runs for an eternity of time — for *thein* in Greek is the same as "to run." But Anaxagoras misinterpreted this name, attributing it to fire, as though the heavenly body were fiery — for aether in in Greek is the same as "to burn," which is proper to fire. But that a heavenly body is not of fire is plain from what has been said above [in L. 4].
