# Lecture 18 — Exclusion of the opinion that natural bodies are not moved naturally to determined places. Unity of the world from higher bodies

120 Further, it is not the action of another body that makes one of these bodies move up and the other down; nor is it constraint, like the 'extrusion' of some writers.  

> 121 For in that case the larger the mass of fire or earth the slower would be the upward or downward movement; but the fact is the reverse: the greater the mass of fire or earth the quicker always is its movement towards its own place.

> 122 Again, the speed of the movement would not increase towards the end if it were due to constraint or extrusion; for a constrained movement always diminishes in speed as the source of constraint becomes more distant,

> 123 and a body moves without constraint to the place whence it was moved by constraint. A consideration of these points, then, gives adequate assurance of the truth of our contentions.

> 124 The same could also be shown with the aid of the discussions which fall under first philosophy, as well as from the nature of the circular movement, which must be eternal both here and in the other worlds.

> 125 It is plain, too, from the following considerations that the universe must be one. The bodily elements are three, and therefore the places of the elements will be three also; the place, first, of the body which sinks to the bottom, namely the region about the center; the place, secondly, of the revolving body, namely the outermost place, and thirdly, the intermediate place, belonging to the intermediate body. Here in this third place will be the body which rises to the surface; since, if not here, it will be elsewhere, and it cannot be elsewhere: for we have two bodies, one weightless, one endowed with weight, and below is place of the body endowed with weight, since the region about the center has been given to the heavy body. And its position cannot be unnatural to it, for it would have to be natural to something else, and there is nothing else. It must then occupy the intermediate place. What distinctions there are within the intermediate itself we will explain later on.

> We have now said enough to make plain the character and number of the bodily elements, the place of each, and further, in general, how many in number the various places are.

> **175**. After showing that natural bodies are by nature moved to definite places, the Philosopher here excludes a contrary opinion.

First, he proposes what he intends;  

secondly, he proves his proposition, at ***for in that case the larger*** (277b2; [176]).  

Now, since truth is established by excluding falsehood, the Philosopher here induces the exclusion of an error as a certain demonstration of the truth. He says, therefore, that what has been said is manifested by the fact that natural bodies are not borne upward and downward as though moved by some external agent. By this is to be understood that he rejects an external mover which would move these bodies *per se* after they obtained their specific form. For light things are indeed moved upward, and heavy bodies downward, by the generator inasmuch as it gives them the form upon which such motion follows, but they are moved per accidens, and not *per se*, by whatever removes an obstacle to their motion. However, some have claimed that after bodies of this kind have received their form, they need to be moved per se by something extrinsic. It is this claim that the Philosopher rejects here. Neither should it be said that these bodies are moved by compulsion, which is the opinion of those who said that they are moved by a certain ***extrusion***, in the sense that one body is displaced by another, stronger, one. For they assumed that there was one motion natural to all bodies, but since some are given momentum by others, it comes to pass that a certain number are moved upward and a certain number downward.  

**176**. Then, at ***for in that case the larger*** (277b2), he proves his proposition with three arguments.  

The first of these is adduced mainly to show that bodies of this kind in their natural motions are not moved by external movers. For it is clear that a motion is slower to the extent that the mover overcomes the mobile less. But a given virtue of the mover overcomes a larger mobile less than a smaller. If, then, these bodies were moved by an external mover, a greater amount of fire would be moved upward more slowly and a larger amount of earth downward more slowly. But just the opposite happens, for a greater quantity of fire and a greater quantity of earth are moved more swiftly to their places. This gives us to understand that these bodies have the principles of their motion within themselves, and their motive powers are greater according as the bodies are greater, and that is why they are moved more swiftly. Consequently, it is plain that such bodies in their natural motions are not moved by an exterior power but by an intrinsic one, which they have received from their generator.  

**177**. At ***again, the speed of the movement*** (277b5) he gives a second argument which is adduced mainly to show that motion of these bodies is not through compulsion. For we see that all things moved by compulsion are moved more slowly according as their distance from the mover increases, as is plain in projectiles, whose motion slackens near the end and finally fails. If, then, heavy and light bodies were moved by compulsion as though mutually pushing one another, it would follow that their motion toward their proper places would not be faster but slower in the end. But the contrary of this is plain to our senses.  

**178**. He gives at ***and a body moves*** (277b8) the third argument which can regard both. For we see that no body is moved by violence to a place whence it can be removed by violence. For it is because a body is apt to be in a certain place that it can be moved thence by violence; hence it was originally brought there naturally and not by violence. If, therefore, it is assumed that some motions of heavy and light bodies are violent by which they are moved from certain places, it cannot be said that the contrary motions which brought them there are violent. Thus it is not true that all the motions of these bodies are caused by another and by violence.  

He concludes from the foregoing, in summary, that speculation on these points will testify to the truth of what has been said.  

**179**. Then, at ***the same could also be shown*** (277b9) he shows through the higher bodies which are moved circularly that the world is one:  

first in a special way by the higher bodies;  

secondly, in a general way by the higher and the lower, at ***it is plain, too*** (277b12; [181]).  

He says therefore first (277b9) that there is still another way of proving that there is but one world, by arguments taken ***from first philosophy***, i.e., by using what has been determined in the *Metaphysics*, and from what has been shown in *Physics* VIII, namely, that circular motion is eternal, which, both in this and in other worlds, has a natural necessity. For the Philosopher concluded to the eternity of celestial motion in *Physics* VIII by considering the order between mobiles and movers, which must be similar in any world, if "world" is taken univocally. Now if celestial motion is eternal, it must be moved by an infinite power, such as cannot exist in a magnitude, as was proved in *Physics* VIII. Such a power is non-material and consequently numerically one, since it is a form and species only, whereas it is through matter that individuals are multiplied in the same species. Consequently, the power that moves the heavens must be numerically one. Hence the heavens too must be numerically one, and, consequently, the whole world.  

**180**. But someone can say that this argument does not conclude with necessity. For the first mover moves the heaven as that which is desired, as is said in *Metaphysics* XII. But there is nothing to prevent the same thing from being accidentally many. So it seems that we cannot from the unity of the first mover conclude necessarily to the unity of the heavens. But it must be said that many can desire one thing, but not indeed in an identical way, since an absolute multitude is not joined immediately to one thing that is first; but many things can desire one thing according to a certain order, some being closer and some more remote, the coordination of which to one ultimate objective makes the unity of the world.  

**181**. Then, at ***it is plain, too*** (277b12) he proves his proposition with an argument taken generally from higher and lower bodies. And he says that even the following consideration will show that it is necessary for the ***heaven***, i.e., the world, to be one. To prove this he assumes that, just as there are three bodily elements, namely, heaven and earth and an intermediate, so there are three places corresponding to them: one is the place about the middle, that of the ***subsisting*** body, i.e., the place of the heaviest body which supports all, namely, earth; another is the place which is the highest in altitude, that of the circularly moved body; the third place is intermediate and corresponds to the intermediate body.  

With regard to these words it should be noted that Aristotle here reckons the heaven among the elements, although an element is something out of which things are composed, as is said in *Metaphysics* V. However the heaven, even though it does not enter into the composition of a mixed body enters into the composition of the whole universe, as being a part of it. Or he is using the word "element" in a wide sense to designate any of the simple bodies which he calls ***bodily elements*** to distinguish them from prime matter, which, though an element, is not a bodily element, for considered in itself it is without any form.  

Secondly, we should consider his statement that there are three places. Now since place is the boundary of a containing body, as is said in *Physics* IV, it can be clear what the place of the intermediate element is—for it is the surface of the supreme, body containing it. How the first body is in place has been explained in *Physics* IV. But how the middle [i.e., the center], which seems to be not a container but a contained, is the place of the heavy body seems to offer difficulty. But it should be said that, as has been said in *Physics* IV, the surface of the containing body does not have the notion of place because it is the surface of such a body but with respect to the position it has in relation to the first container accordingly, namely, as it is nearer or farther from it. Now the heavy body in its nature is at a maximum distance from the celestial body on account of its materiality; therefore there is due it a place farthest from the first container and nearest to the middle. Consequently the surface containing the heavy body is called its place according to its nearness to the center. Hence he said advisedly that the place located ***around the middle*** is the place of the subsisting body.  

**182**. From what has been set forth he goes on to prove his proposition from a light body, just as above he had proceeded from a heavy body. For it is necessary that a light body which is borne upwards be in this intermediate place: because, since every body is in some place, if the light body were not in this intermediate place, it would be outside it. But that is impossible, because outside this intermediate place there is, on the one side, celestial body which has no heaviness or lightness, and on the other side, terrestrial body which has heaviness. Now it cannot be said that there is a place more downward than the place of the body having heaviness, because the place about the middle is proper to it. But from this it is plainly impossible for another world to exist, because some light body would have to be there and thus, if that world were above this world, a light body would exist above the place of the heavens; if that world were below this world, a light body would be below the place of the heavy body—which is impossible.  

**183**. But to this argument someone could object that the light body would be outside this intermediate place not according to nature but outside its nature. To exclude this he adds that not even outside its nature can a light body be outside this intermediate place. Because every place that is outside nature for some body is according to nature for some other body. For neither God nor nature has made any place in vain, i.e., a place in which no body is apt to be. Now, no other body is found in nature except the three mentioned and to which the aforesaid places are deputed, as is plain from what has been said. Hence neither according to nature nor beside nature can a light body exist outside this intermediate place. Consequently, it is impossible that there be many worlds.  

Since he had spoken of an intermediate element as if it were one certain body, he adds that later, i.e., in the third and fourth books, he will speak about; the differences in that intermediate. For it is divided into fire, air and water, which is also light in relation to earth.  

Finally in summary he concludes that from the foregoing it is manifest about the bodily elements, which and how many they are, and what is the place of each of them and, in general, how many bodily places exist.
