# Lecture 19 — Solution of the argument seeming to justify several worlds

127 We must show not only that the heaven is one, but also that more than one heaven is and, further, that, as exempt from decay and generation, the heaven is eternal. We may begin by raising a difficulty.  

> 128 From one point of view it might seem impossible that the heaven should be one and unique, since in all formations and products whether of nature or of art we can distinguish the shape in itself and the shape in combination with matter. For instance the form of the sphere is one thing and the gold or bronze sphere another; the shape of the circle again is one thing, the bronze or wooden circle another. For when we state the essential nature of the sphere or circle we do not include in the formula gold or bronze, because they do not belong to the essence, but if we are speaking of the copper or gold sphere we do include them. We still make the distinction even if we cannot conceive or apprehend any other example beside the particular thing. This may, of course, sometimes be the case: it might be, for instance, that only one circle could be found; yet none the less the difference will remain between the being of circle and of this particular circle, the one being form, the other form in matter, i.e. a particular thing.

> 129 Now since the universe is perceptible it must be regarded as a particular; for everything that is perceptible subsists, as we know, in matter.

> 130 But if it is a particular, there will be a distinction between the being of 'this universe' and of 'universe' unqualified. There is a difference, then, between 'this universe' and simple 'universe'; the second is form and shape, the first form in combination with matter;

> 131 and any shape or form has, or may have, more than one particular instance.

> 132 On the supposition of Forms such as some assert, this must be the case, and equally on the view that no such entity has a separate existence. For in every case in which the essence is in matter it is a fact of observation that the particulars of like form are several or infinite in number.

> 133 Hence there either are, or may be, more heavens than one. On these grounds, then, it might be inferred either that there are or that there might be several heavens.

> 134 We must, however, return and ask how much of this argument is correct and how much not. Now it is quite right to say that the formula of the shape apart from the matter must be different from that of the shape in the matter, and we may allow this to be true. We are not, however, therefore compelled to assert a plurality of worlds. Such a plurality is in fact impossible if this world contains the entirety of matter, as in fact it does.

> 135 But perhaps our contention can be made clearer in this way. Suppose 'aquilinity' to be curvature in the nose or flesh, and flesh to be the matter of aquilinity. Suppose further, that all flesh came together into a single whole of flesh endowed with this aquiline quality. Then neither would there be, nor could there arise, any other thing that was aquiline. Similarly, suppose flesh and bones to be the matter of man, and suppose a man to be created of all flesh and all bones in indissoluble union. The possibility of another man would be removed. Whatever case you took it would be the same. The general rule is this: a thing whose essence resides in a substratum of matter can never come into being in the absence of all matter.

> 136 Now the universe is certainly a particular and a material thing: if however, it is composed not of a part but of the whole of matter, then though the being of 'universe' and of 'this universe' are still distinct, yet there is no other universe, and no possibility of others being made, because all the matter is already included in this.

> **184**. After showing that there is but one world, the Philosopher here shows that it is impossible for there to be many. And it was necessary to prove this, because nothing prevents the possibility of something's being false [now] which can yet be true [later]. Concerning this he does three things:

first, he presents an objection which seems to show that it is possible that many worlds exist;  

secondly, he answers it, at ***we must, however, return and ask*** (278a22; [194]);  

thirdly, he proves something he had presupposed in his answer, at ***it remains, then, only to prove*** (L. 20; 278b8).  

About the first he does two things:  

first he states his intention and his plan of treatment;  

secondly, he begins to prove his proposition, at ***from one point of view it might seem*** (277b29; [186]).  

**185**. He says therefore first (277b27) that after the foregoing, we must still prove that not only is there one world but that it is impossible for there to be more, and further that the world is eternal, so as to be imperishable, i.e. never ceasing to be, and unborn, i.e., never beginning to be, according to his opinion. He states this because the first consideration seems somehow to depend on the second. For if the world were generable and perishable by union and separation, according to friendship and strife, as Empedocles said, many worlds would be possible in the sense that when one had perished another would be generated later, as Empedocles believed. And because the truth is truly known when the difficulties which seem to be contrary to it are solved, therefore the first thing to do is bring forth the difficulties concerning this, i.e., which seem to indicate that there are or can be many worlds—for the solution to this difficulty will confirm the truth.  

**186**. Then, at ***from one point of view it might seem*** (277b29) he presents the argument that could lead one to question whether it is not possible for more than one world to exist. Hence, he prefaces the remark that, for those who hold this point of view, i.e., the one coinciding with the argument to follow, it will appear impossible that it, namely, the world, be one and unique, i.e., that there be ***necessarily*** just one world. For the following argument does not prove that it is necessary that there be several worlds, which is equivalent to its being impossible that there be but one; rather it proves that it is possible that there be more than one world, which is equivalent to its not being necessary that there be but one. Now in order to show this he induces an argument containing two syllogisms:  

the first of these is at (278a10; [187]);  

the second at ***and any shape or form*** (278a15; [190]).  

The first syllogism is this: In all sensible things that come to be by art or by nature, the consideration of the form considered in itself is one thing and the consideration of the form insofar as it is in matter is another. But the heaven is a sensible thing having a form in matter. Therefore, the absolute consideration of its form, i.e., as considered universally, is one thing, and the consideration of its form in matter, i.e., as considered in particular is another.  

First, therefore, he presents the major, at ***now since the universe*** (278a10; [187]);  

secondly, the minor (278a10; [188]);  

thirdly, he draws the conclusion, at ***but if it is a particular*** (278a12; [189]).  

**187**. He says therefore first (278a10) that in all things that exist and were ***generated***, i.e., made, either by nature or by art, the form considered according to itself is one thing according to our consideration, and the form ***mixed with matter***, i.e., the form taken as joined with matter, is another. He first explains this by an example in mathematical objects in which it is more evident, because sensible matter does not enter therein. For the species of a sphere is according to our consideration other than the form of the sphere in sensible matter, which is denoted when a sphere is called "golden" or "bronze"; similarly, the form of a circle is one thing, and what is meant by a golden or bronze circle is another. And this is evident, because when we give the ***quod quid erat esse***, i.e., the defining notion, of a circle or a sphere, we make no mention therein of gold or bronze. This implies that to be "golden" or "bronze" does not pertain to their substance [essence], which the definition signifies.  

But there seems to be a difficulty in natural things, whose forms cannot exist or be understood without sensible matter, as "snub" cannot exist and be understood without "nose." Natural forms, however, although they cannot be understood without sensible matter in common, can be understood without signed sensible matter, which is the principle of individuation and of singularity. Thus, "foot" cannot be understood without flesh and bones, but it can be understood without this flesh and these bones. And therefore he adds that if we cannot understand and accept in our consideration anything outside the ***singular***, i.e., outside the matter which is included in the notion of the ***individual***, namely, as it is signate—because sometimes there is nothing to prevent this from happening (namely, that a form be able to be understood without sensible matter) in the same way that we understood a circle without sensible matter; nevertheless, in natural things, in which forms are not understood without matter, the notions of the thing taken in common and taken in the singular are not the same, any more than the notion of "man" and of "this man" are the same. Thus, the ***essence*** of "circle" and "this circle," i.e., of the notions defining a circle, and this circle, are different. For the notion of a thing in common is the ***species***, i.e., the notion of the species, but the notion of a particular thing signifies the notion of the species as found in determinate matter, and pertains to the singular.  

**188**. Then, at ***now since the universe*** (278a10) he presents the minor of his syllogism. And he says that since the ***heaven*,** i.e., the world, is something sensible, it must be among the singulars, for every sensible thing exists in matter. For a form not in matter is not sensible but intelligible only—for sensible qualities are characteristics of matter.  

**189**. Then, at ***but if it is a particular*** (278a12) he presents the conclusion and says that if the ***heaven***, i.e., the world, belongs among the singulars, as has been shown, ***its notion as a*** singular ***heaven will differ from its notion*** ***absolutely***, i.e., taken universally the two notions will differ. Consequently, it follows that ***this heaven*** taken singularly will be different in consideration from ***heaven*** taken universally, i.e., this latter heaven taken universally will be as a species and form, while the other, namely, that taken singularly, will be as form joined to matter. However, this is not to be taken as implying that in the definition of a natural thing taken universally no matter is mentioned at all, but rather that individual matter is not mentioned.  

**190**. Then, at ***and any shape or form*** (278a15) he presents the second syllogism, as follows: whatever things have their forms in matter, are, or are able to be, several individuals of one species. But ***this heaven*** signifies a form in matter, as was said. Therefore, there either are, or can be, many heavens.  

Now in regard to this he first presents the major;  

secondly, he explains it, at ***on the supposition of forms*** (278a16; [191]);  

thirdly, he draws the conclusion at ***hence there either are*** (278a20; [192]).  

He takes the minor from the previous syllogism.  

He says therefore first **that all things of which there is a form and species** (278a15), i.e., which are not themselves forms and species, but have forms and species, are either many individuals of one species or many can exist. But things that are themselves forms and subsistent species, as are separated substances, cannot have several members of one species.  

**191**. Then, at ***on the supposition of Forms*** (278a16) he explains the foregoing both according to Plato's opinion and according to his own. And he says that whether there are ***species***, i.e., separated ideas, as the Platonists assume, then this must happen, i.e., there must be several individuals of one species—because the separated species is posited as the exemplar of a sensible thing and it is possible to make many copies according to one exemplar; or whether no such species exist separately, there can still be several individuals of one species. For we see this happen in all things whose ***substance*** (i.e., whose essence, which is signified by the definition) exists in signate matter, namely, that there are several individuals, or even an infinitude of individuals, of one species. The reason for this is that, since signate matter does not enter the notion of the species, the notion of the species can be indifferently verified in this individual matter and in that; consequently, there can be many individuals of one species.  

**192**. Then, at ***hence there either are*** (278a20) he draws the intended conclusion, namely, that either there are many worlds or many worlds can be made.  

Finally he says in summary that from the foregoing someone can conjecture that either there are, or can be, many worlds.  

**193**. But there seems to be a conflict here between Aristotle and Plato. For Plato in the Timaeus proved the oneness of the world from the oneness of the exemplar; but here Aristotle from the oneness of the separated species concludes to the possibility of several worlds. But two answers can be given to this. First on the part of the exemplar, which, if it is one in such a way that oneness is its essence, then the copy must imitate the exemplar in this oneness. But the first separated exemplar is such. Hence also the world, which is the first copy thereof, must be one. This was the way Plato proceeded in his proof. But if oneness is not of the essence of the exemplar but is outside its essence, then the copy could be like the exemplar in respect to what belongs to its species—for example, in the notion of man or horse—but not in respect to oneness. And it is in this way that Aristotle's reasoning proceeds. Or it can be answered from the viewpoint of the copy, which is more perfect to the extent that it is more faithful to the exemplar. Therefore, some copies are like one exemplar in respect to oneness of species, but not in respect to numerical oneness. But the heaven, which is a perfect copy, is like its exemplar with respect to numerical oneness.  

**194**. Then, at ***we must, however, return and ask*** (278a22), he solves this objection:  

first, he gives the solution;  

secondly, he explains it, at ***but perhaps our contention can be made clearer*** (278a28; [195]).  

He says, therefore, first, that in order to settle the above doubt we must once more consider what was said well and what not well. For if all the premises are true, the conclusion is necessarily true. He says, therefore, that it was correct to say that the notion of form differs, namely, in the case of that which is without matter and in the case of that which is with matter. This is to be granted as true. Consequently, the first conclusion which is the minor of the second syllogism is conceded. But from this it does not follow of necessity either that there are several worlds, or that there can be several, if it is true that this world consists of all its matter, as is true and as will be proved below. For the major proposition of the second syllogism, namely, that things which have a form in matter can be numerically many in one species, is not true except in things that do not consist of their entire matter.  

**195**. Then, at ***but perhaps our contention can be made clearer*** (278a28), he explains what he had said with an example.  

First, he gives the examples;  

secondly, he adapts them to his proposition, at ***now the universe is certainly a particular*** (278b3; [196]).  

He says therefore first (278a28) that what has been said will become clearer from what will be said. For snub-nosedness is curvature in a nose or in flesh; thus flesh is the matter of snub-nosedness. If then from all flesh one flesh were to be made, namely, the flesh of one nose, and snub-nosedness existed in it, nothing else would be snub-nosed nor could be. And the same holds for man, since flesh and bones are the matter of man: if one man were formed from all the flesh and all the bones, so that he could now not be destroyed, there could be no more than one man—but if he could be destroyed, it would be possible, after his corruption, for another man to exist, just as when a box is destroyed, another can be made from the same wood. And the same is true for other things. And the reason for this he assigns, namely, that none of the things whose form is in matter can come into being if the proper matter is not at hand, any more than a house could be made if there were not stones and wood. Consequently, if there were no bones and flesh other than those of which the one man is composed, no other man could come into being but him.  

**196**. Then, at ***now the universe is certainly a particular*** (278b3) he adapts this to his proposition. And he says it is true that the heaven is a singular thing and one constituted of matter. But it is not constituted out of part of its matter, but out of all of it. And therefore, although there is a difference between the notions of "heaven" and "this heaven," there neither is, nor can be, another heaven, due to the fact that all the matter of heaven is comprehended under this heaven.  

**197**. However, it should be realized that some prove the possibility of many worlds in other ways. In one way, as follows: the world was made by God; but the power of God, since it is infinite, is not limited to this world alone. Therefore it is not reasonable to say that he cannot make yet other worlds. To this it must be said that if God were to make other worlds, he would make them either like or unlike this world. If entirely alike, they would be in vain—and that conflicts with his wisdom. If unlike, none of them would comprehend in itself every nature of sensible body; consequently no one of them would be perfect, but one perfect world would result from all of them.  

In another way, as follows: to the extent that something is more noble, to that extent is its species more powerful. But the world is nobler than any natural thing existing here. Therefore, since the species of a natural thing existing here, for example, of a horse or cow, could perfect many individuals, much more so can the species of the whole world perfect many individuals. But to this it must be answered that it takes more power to make one perfect than to make several imperfect. Now the single individuals of natural things which exist here are imperfect, because no one of them comprehends within itself the total of what, pertains to its species. But it is in this way that the world is perfect; hence, from that very fact its species is shown to be more powerful.  

Thirdly, one objects thus: it is better for the best to be multiplied than for things not so good. But the world is the best. Therefore, it is better to have many worlds than many animals or many plants. To this it must be said that here it pertains to the goodness of the world to be one, because oneness possesses the aspect of goodness. For we see that through being divided some things lose their proper goodness.
