# Lecture 3 — The mystery of God’s will

***^1:8^ Which has superabounded in us, in all wisdom and prudence, [n. 22]***

> ^1:9^ That he might make known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his purpose, which he has purposed in him, [n. 25]

> ^1:10^ In the dispensation of the fullness of times, to re-establish all things in Christ, that are in heaven and on earth, in him. [n. 28]

> **21**. Having set down the blessings generally given to all, the Apostle now turns to those favors especially granted to the apostles. This section is divided into two parts:

first, he proposes the special blessings given the apostles;  

second, he indicates their cause, at** *in whom we are also called by lot* **(Eph 1:11).  

In reference to the first he does three things:  

first, he sets down the particular blessings of the apostles as regards the excellence of their wisdom;  

second, as regards a unique revelation of the hidden mystery, at ***that he might make known***;  

third, he suggests what this mystery is, at ***according to his purpose***.  

**22**. He first states: according to the riches of his grace all the faithful together, both you and we, possess redemption and the remission of sins through the blood of Christ. This grace ***has superabounded in us*** who have it more fully than others.  

**23**. Whence the rashness—not to say error—of those who dare equate the grace and glory of some saints with that of the apostles. For this passage openly asserts that the apostles are more fully graced than the other saints, except for Christ and his Virgin Mother.  

However, should it be claimed that other saints were able to merit as much as the apostles merited, and consequently would have as much grace, it must be said that this would be a good argument if grace was given according to merits—but if that were the case, *grace is no more grace* (Rom 11:6).  

Greater dignity was preordained by God to some saints, and hence he infused grace more abundantly into them. For example, he imparted a unique grace to Christ as man when he assumed the humanity into the unity of his person. He endowed with special graces in both her body and soul, the glorious Virgin Mary whom he chose to be his mother. Similarly, those God called to a unique dignity, the apostles, were gifted with a corresponding favor of grace. Thus the Apostle states: *ourselves also, who have the first fruits of the Spirit* (Rom 8:23). And a Gloss comments: *their share is first in time and more copious than others*.  

What rashness, therefore, to put some later saint on the same level with the apostles.  

**24**. God’s grace has superabounded in the apostles, ***in all wisdom***. For the apostles are set over the Church to be her pastors: *and I will give you pastors according to my own heart: and they shall feed you with knowledge and doctrine* (Jer 3:15).  

Two qualities should characterize pastors: a profound knowledge of divine truths and an assiduous fulfillment of religious actions. They must teach those trusted to them the true faith; this requires that wisdom which consists in a knowledge of the divine, concerning which he remarks ***in all wisdom***. *For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to resist and gainsay* (Luke 21:15).  

They also need ***prudence*** to guide their subjects in external and temporal affairs: *be therefore prudent as serpents and simple as doves* (Matt 10:16).  

Thus the special blessing of wisdom given to the apostles is clearly expressed.  

**25**. The reception of an uncommon revelation is their next blessing, ***that he might make known unto us the mystery***. As if he had said: our wisdom does not consist in discovering the natures of material realities, nor the course of the stars, or such like; rather, it concerns Christ alone. *I decided not to know anything among you, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified* (1 Cor 2:2). Hence he says ***that he might make known the mystery***, that is, the sacred secret, hidden from the beginning, the mystery of the Incarnation.  

He adds the cause of this hidden mystery when he says ***his will***. Future events are known only if their causes are; for example, we can determine a future eclipse only by knowing what causes an eclipse. Now the mystery of the Incarnation has God’s will as its cause since he willed to become incarnate on account of his intense love for men: *for God so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son* (John 3:16). Yet God’s will is more hidden than anything else: *no one knows what pertains to God, but the Spirit of God* (1 Cor 2:11). So, the cause of the Incarnation was concealed from everyone except those to whom God revealed it through the Holy Spirit, as the Apostle mentions: *God has revealed to us through the Spirit. For the Spirit searches everything, even the depths of God* (1 Cor 2:10).  

Hence he affirms ***that he might make known the mystery*** which is a sacred secret—a secret because it is ***of his will***. *I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, for hiding these things from the wise and clever and revealing them to little children* (Matt 11:25). *The mystery, hidden from ages and generations, and now made manifest to his saints, to whom God would make known the riches of the glory of this mystery* (Col 1:26–27).  

**26**. He then explains something about this mystery, at ***according to his purpose***.  

His thought is involved and should be construed as: ***that he might make known unto us the mystery of his will***, which mystery is ***to re-establish all things in Christ***, that is, through Christ. All, namely, that are ***in heaven and on earth***. This re-establishment in Christ must be ***in the dispensation of the fullness of times* **which, in turn, is ***according to his purpose***. Thus, three aspects of the mystery are touched on: the mystery’s cause, the fittingness of the time of its appearance, and its purpose.  

**27**. ***According to his purpose*** briefly sums up the cause. Although whatever pleases God is good, God’s pleasure in making known this mystery is antonomastically said to be good because through it we are led to perfectly enjoy goodness. *Yahweh is pleased with those who fear him, who rely on his strength* (Ps 147:11); *that you may prove what is the good and the acceptable and the perfect will of God* (Rom 12:2).  

**28**. The suitable time was ***in that dispensation of the fullness of times***. *But when the fullness of the time came, God sent his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, that he might redeem them who were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons* (Gal 4:4–5).  

The pointless problem pagans used to raise is thus brushed aside by the Apostle. *Times are not hidden from the Almighty* (Job 24:1). He orders and arranges everything, including time; for he manages and accommodates the passage of time to those events which he wills to exist at the right moment. Just as other events effected by him had their specified time, likewise he eternally preordained a time for the mystery of the Incarnation. This time, a Gloss points out, occurred after man was convinced of his own stupidity before the written law, when he worshiped creatures instead of the Creator—*for, professing themselves to be wise, they became fools* (Rom 1:22)—and of his own absolute inability to live up to the prescriptions of the written law. Thus men, no longer trusting in their own wisdom and power, would not consider Christ’s advent as unimportant. Weak, and to a certain extent ignorant, they would eagerly desire the Christ.  

**29**. The mystery’s purpose is to ***re-establish all things***. Inasmuch as everything was made for mankind, everything is said to be re-established: *in that day I will raise up the booth of David that had fallen; I will close up its breaches and rebuild it as long ago* (Amos 9:11).  

***Everything that is in heaven***, namely, the angels. Christ did not die for the angels, but in redeeming mankind *he shall fill the ruins* (Ps 110:6) left by the sin of the angels. Beware of the error Origen fell into, as if the damned angels were to be redeemed through Christ; this was only a figment of his imagination.  

***And what is on earth*** insofar as he reconciles heavenly and earthly realities: *making peace through the blood of his cross, both as to the things that are on earth and the things that are in heaven* (Col 1:20). This must be understood in reference to the sufficiency of the redemption, even though, with respect to its efficacy, everything will not be re-established.
