# Lecture 5 — Signed with the Spirit

^1:13^ In whom you also, after you had heard the word of truth (the Gospel of your salvation), in whom also believing, you were signed with the Holy Spirit of promise. [n. 37]  

> ^1:14^ Who is the pledge of our inheritance, unto the redemption of acquisition, unto the praise of his glory. [n. 43]

> **36**. Once the Apostle has enumerated the blessings offered generally to all the faithful, then those especially given the apostles, he begins to recount those granted to the Ephesians themselves.

This section is divided into two parts:  

first, he sets down the favors shown them;  

second, he describes his feelings aroused by the favors, at ***wherefore, I also* **(Eph 1:15).  

The first is divided into three parts according to the three blessings granted to them:  

first, the blessing of preaching;  

second, the blessing of conversion to the faith, at ***in whom also believing***;  

third, the blessing of justification, at ***were signed***.  

**37**. In reference to the first point he says: Christ ***in whom you also, after you had heard***, that is, by whose favor and power you have heard the proclamation of the ***word of truth*** since Christ himself has sent those who preach it to you. *How shall they believe him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear, without a preacher? And how shall they preach unless they be sent? . . . faith, then, comes by hearing; and hearing by the word of Christ* (Rom 10:14–15, 17). They hear through the blessing of him who sends them the preachers: *blessed are they who hear the word of God and keep it* (Luke 11:28).  

**38**. The Apostle mentions the threefold recommendation of this preached word. It is, first of all, true; ***a word of truth***. Indeed, it could be nothing else since its source is Christ, concerning whom it is written: *your word is truth* (John 17:7); *for of his own will he has begotten us by the word of truth* (Jas 1:18).  

Second, it is a proclamation of good news. Hence he says ***the* G*ospel***: it announces the highest good and eternal life. ‘Word of faith’ is antonomastically applicable to the Gospel as the communication of the highest good. *How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him who brings good news and preaches salvation . . . go up on a high mountain, lady-messenger of Zion* (Isa 52:7; 40:9). This refers to future goods.  

The present goods are what describe and recommend the preached word in the third place, for it saves. Thus he says ***of your salvation***; if believed in, it gives salvation. *I am not ashamed of the Gospel. For it is the power of God unto salvation to all who believe* (Rom 1:16). *Now I make known unto you, brothers, the Gospel which I preached to you, which also you have received and wherein you stand, by which also you are saved* (1 Cor 15:1).  

**39**. Regarding the blessing of conversion to the faith, he states ***in whom***, namely, Christ, by whose action you ***also believing, were signed***. This blessing is applied to faith since faith is necessary for those who listen. In vain would anyone listen to the word of truth if he did not believe, and the believing itself is through Christ. ***By grace you are saved through faith, and that not of yourselves, for it is the gift of God*** (Eph 2:8).  

**40**. Concerning the blessing of justification he mentions that ***you were signed with the Holy Spirit*** who was given to you. Concerning this Spirit three things are said: he is a sign, the Spirit of the promise, and the pledge of our inheritance.  

**41**. He is a sign inasmuch as through him charity is infused into our hearts, thereby distinguishing us from those who are not the children of God. Relating to this he says ***you were signed***, set apart from Satan’s fold. ***Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God; whereby you are sealed unto the day of redemption*** (Eph 4:30). Just as men brand a mark on their own herds to differentiate them from others, so the Lord willed to seal his own flock, his people, with a spiritual sign.  

The Lord had the Jews as his own people in the Old Testament. *And you, my flocks, the flocks of my pastures are men* (Ezek 34:31). *And we are the people of his pasture and the sheep of his hand* (Ps 95:7). This flock was fed on the earthly pastures of material teachings and temporal goods: *if you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good things of the land* (Isa 1:19). The Lord, therefore, differentiated and set them apart from others by means of the bodily sign of circumcision. *And my covenant shall be in your flesh* (Gen 17:13); before this it says, *you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, that it may be for a sign of the covenant between me and you* (Gen 17:11).  

In the New Testament the flock he had is the Christian people: *you have returned to the shepherd and guardian of your souls* (1 Pet 2:25). *My sheep hear my voice; and I know them; and they follow me* (John 10:27). This flock is fed on the pastures of spiritual doctrine and spiritual favors; hence the Lord differentiated it from others by a spiritual sign. This is the Holy Spirit through whom those who are of Christ are distinguished from the others who do not belong to him. But since the Holy Spirit is love, he is given to someone when that person is made a lover of God and neighbor. *God’s love has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit which has been given to us* (Rom 5:5).  

Therefore, the distinctive sign is charity which comes from the Holy Spirit: *by this shall all men know that you are my disciples, if you have love one for another* (John 13:35). The Holy Spirit is he by whom we are signed.  

**42**. The Spirit is described as a promise for three reasons. First, he is promised to those who believe: *I will put a new spirit within you . . . and I will give you a new spirit* (Ezek 36:26; 37:6). Second, he is given with a certain promise, because by the very fact that he is given to us we become the children of God. For through the Holy Spirit we are made one with Christ: *anyone who does not have the Spirit of God, does not belong to him* (Rom 8:9). As a result we are made adopted children of God, and thus we have the promise of an eternal inheritance since *if sons, heirs also* (Rom 8:17).  

**43**. Third, he is termed a ***pledge*** inasmuch as he makes us certain of the promised inheritance. Adopting us into the children of God, the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of promise who also is the seal of the promise yet to be attained.  

However, as is mentioned in a Gloss, a variant reading has ***who is the earnest of our inheritance***, and perhaps this is a better rendering. For a pledge differs from the object in place of which it is given, and it must be returned once he who has received the pledge obtains the object due him. An earnest, however, does not differ from the object in place of which it is given, nor is it returned since it is a partial payment of the price itself, which is not to be withdrawn but completed. God communicates charity to us as a pledge, through the Holy Spirit who is the Spirit of truth and love. Hence, this is nothing else than an individual and imperfect participation in the divine charity and love; it must not be withdrawn but brought to perfection. More fittingly, therefore, it is referred to as an earnest rather than as a pledge.  

Nevertheless, it can also be called a pledge. For through the Holy Spirit God grants us a variety of gifts. Some of these will remain in the fatherland, as charity which *never comes to an end* (1 Cor 13:8); while others will not last on account of their imperfection, such as faith and hope *which shall be done away* with (1 Cor 13:10). Hence, the Holy Spirit is called an earnest in reference to what will remain, and a pledge with respect to what will be done away with.  

**44**. He adds the purpose for which we are signed as ***unto the redemption***. For when a man buys new animals and adds them to his flock, he puts a mark on them to the effect that he has purchased them. Now Christ has purchased a people from the gentiles. *Other sheep I have that are not of this fold; them also I must bring. And they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold and one shepherd* (John 10:16). And on them he imprints a sign of purchase: *a holy nation, a purchased people* (1 Pet 2:9) *which he has purchased with his own blood* (Acts 20:28).  

Christ acquired this people, not because they never were his, but because they previously belonged to him and yet, by sinning, had sold themselves into a diabolical slavery which oppressed them. So it does not simply state that he acquired them but adds ***unto redemption***, as though to say: you are not strictly a new acquisition; you are re-purchased from the slavery of the devil through his blood. *You were not redeemed with corruptible things as gold or silver, from the vain manner of life handed down from your fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ* (1 Pet 1:18–19). Christ purchased us, therefore, through a redemption; not that this added anything to God since he needs none of our goods. *If you are righteous, what do you give him, or what does he receive of your hand?* (Job 35:7).  

The purpose for which Christ acquired us is ***unto the praise of his glory***, that God himself be praised since *everyone who calls upon my name, I have created him for my glory* (Isa 43:7).
