# Lecture 5 — Order of Christ’s body

^4:14^ That henceforth we be no more children tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the wickedness of men, by cunning craftiness by which they lie in wait to deceive. [n. 219]  

> ^4:15^ But doing the truth in charity, we may in all things grow up in him who is the head, even Christ: [n. 221]

> ^4:16^ From whom the whole body, being compacted and fitly joined together, by what every joint supplies, according to the operation in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of itself in charity. [n. 225]

> **218**. Having spoken of the diversity of spiritual gifts and their fruit, now the Apostle describes how we attain to that fruit.

Concerning this he does two things:  

first, he removes two obstacles;  

second, he teaches the way of gaining access to them, at ***doing the truth***.  

**219**. It was well said, he says, that the ultimate fruit of these gifts is for us to meet the Lord as a ***perfect man unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ***. We are obliged ***henceforth*** to cease being ***children*** and become mature men; for as long as a person is a boy he is not a perfect man. Whoever is to meet the Lord must leave his childhood behind. The Apostle did just that: *when I became a man, I put away the things of a child* (1 Cor 13:11).  

It is a quality of the child never to be fixed or determinate in anything; he rather believes whatever is told him. To act like grown men we have to abandon a fickle oscillation and instability in our judgments. That is why he says ***tossed to and fro***. *Do not become children mentally; in malice be children but in your mind be mature* (1 Cor 14:20).  

Those who waver are called such from the word *wave*; like a wave ***tossed to and fro*** they are not firm in the faith. *He that wavers is like a wave of the sea, which is moved and carried about by the wind* (Jas 1:6). But now it is imperative for us to stand firm and not fluctuate.  

**220**. Evil teachings are like the wind which is spoken of with merit: *the north wind brings forth rain* (Prov 25:23). *And the rain fell, and the floods came and the winds blew; and they beat upon that house. And it fell; and great was the fall thereof* (Matt 7:27). Hence he warns against being ***carried about with every wind of doctrine***. As though he said: we must not be shaken by these wicked doctrines that buff about seeking to agitate hearts and ruin spiritual accomplishments. Three qualities demonstrate that it is not good doctrine. First, its source is ***the wickedness of men***. Not being sound doctrine, but false and wicked, someone will concoct dogmas out of it in order to wield dominion over others, even though souls are lost. Such were the teachings of that most wicked Arius whose abdomen burst asunder. He could be made the subject of what is written: *the testimony of his wickedness is true* (Sir 31:29).  

Second, its methods are by ***cunning craftiness*** to mean one thing and pretend to hold some other opinion. On this account the Apostle wrote: *I fear lest, as the serpent seduced Eve by his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted and fall from the simplicity that is in Christ* (2 Cor 11:3).  

Third, this is also evident from its effects, for such doctrine ***lies in wait to deceive***. Its teachers seduce and lie in wait, not to rob money or temporal goods, but to spread errors. *Evil men and seducers shall grow worse and worse; erring, and driving into error* (2 Tim 3:13).  

**221**. Next, when he says ***doing the truth***, having pointed out the impediments which prevent one from acquiring the fruit of spiritual gifts, he discloses here how that fruit can be attained. He argues this way: it was said just now that to obtain the fruit of these spiritual gifts we must stop being children and grow up into mature adults. As long as we are childish we have not reached a mature state, neither do we grow. Hence, it is necessary for us to grow up. This is what he says about ***doing the truth in charity***.  

Hence he makes two points:  

first, he shows in what areas we ought to grow up;  

second, through whom we are to grow, at ***in him who is the head***.  

**222**. With respect to the first he states ***doing the truth in charity, we may grow up*** in good works and the form of good works, which two are truth and charity.  

Any good work is at times referred to as truth: *even in his captivity he forsook not the way of truth* (Tob 1:2). Let us, therefore, do the truth, namely, every good work. Or, put true doctrine into practice since it is not enough simply to hear or teach the truth, it must be acted on as well. Thus the Apostle counsels Timothy: *take heed to yourself and to doctrine; be earnest in them. For in doing this you shall both save yourself and them that hear you* (1 Tim 4:16). *Be doers of the word and not hearers only* (Jas 1:22) since *doers shall be justified* (Rom 2:13), that is, if they act out of charity, the form of good works. *Do manfully and be strengthened. Let all your actions be done in charity* (1 Cor 16:13–14); otherwise they will be useless: *if I should distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if I should deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing* (1 Cor 13:3).  

**223**. Because not to make progress in the approach to God is itself a retrogression, the Apostle adds that ***we may grow up in him***, where he states three points by explaining:  

first, the author of our development;  

second, the truth about him;  

third, the manner of the development.  

He describes the second at ***from whom the whole body***, and the third at ***according to the operation in the measure of every part***.  

**224**. He asks that ***we may grow up in him***, namely, in Christ, of whom it is written: *in him may you grow unto salvation* (1 Pet 2:2). ***In him***, I repeat, ***who is the head, Christ***, and in the Church which is his body (Col 1:24). Let us increase, not in wealth as was said of Job that *his possession has increased on the earth* (Job 1:10), but in spiritual goods. Nor in one area only, but ***in all things***, that is, being fruitful and increasing in every good. *Whatsoever else you do, do all to the glory of God . . . as I also in all things please all men* (1 Cor 10:31; 33). The Apostle commends the Corinthians on this score: *now, I praise you, brethren, that in all things you are mindful of me and keep my ordinances as I have delivered them to you* (1 Cor 11:2).  

**225**. Next, when he says ***from the whole body***, he speaks about the truth of Christ through whom we ought to grow.  

Three points concerning an organic body are to be kept in mind: its organs are interrelated, they are bound together by tendons, and each member serves the rest. *If the foot should say: because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? And if the ear should say: because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? If the whole body were the eye, where would be the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where would be the smelling?* (1 Cor 12:15–17).  

Therefore, one body is composed of many members in these three ways: through its structured whole or unity, through its connective bindings, and through its reciprocal actions and assistance, just as all these actions of interrelating organs, the connecting of tendons, and movements take their initiative from the body’s head, so the spiritual counterparts of these flow from Christ, our head, into his body, the Church.  

**226**. First, there is a structured unity through faith. Whence he says ***from whom***, namely Christ, who is our head, as was already mentioned, ***the whole body, being compacted*** is joined together in a unity. *He will gather together the dispersed of Israel* (Ps 147:2). *He will gather together unto him all nations, and heap together unto him all people* (Hab 2:5). Christ is *the head, from which the whole body, by joints and bands, being supplied with nourishment and compacted, grows unto the increase of God* (Col 2:19).  

**227**. Second, a connecting and binding force emanates from Christ, the head, into his body, the Church, since whatever is united must be held together or bound by some nexus or bond. On this account he says ***fitly joined together, by what every joint supplies***, that is, through the faith and charity which unite and knit the members of the mystical body to one another for their mutual support. *All the works of the Lord are good: and he will furnish every work in due time* (Sir 39:39).  

Thus the Apostle himself, confident of this mutual being-of-service which reigns among the members of the Church due to the divine unifying action, had said: *I know that this shall happen to me unto salvation, through your prayer and the assistance of the Spirit of Jesus Christ* (Phil 1:19).  

**228**. Third, from Christ the head there is infused into his members the power to act in order that they may grow spiritually. For this reason he states ***according to the operation in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body***. As if he said: not only is the structured unity of the members of the Church through faith, and their connection or being joined together through the mutual service of charity, from Christ the head. Indeed, from him comes the actual operation or movements of the members needed for action, and this according to the measure and competency of each member. Thus he asserts that Christ accomplishes the ***increase*** ***of the body according to the operation*** and ***in the*** due ***measure of every part***. Therefore, the body not only grows through the faith which compacts it into a structured whole and through charity’s mutual assistance, but also through the actual binding force which flows out from each member according to the degree of grace given him; and also through the actual impulse to act which God effects in us. *You have wrought all our works for us* (Isa 26:12). He is the *same God who works all in all* (1 Cor 12:6).  

This interpretation accords with that of the glossator.  

**229**. But why does God make each member grow? To build up the body. ***In whom all the building, being framed together, grows up into a holy temple in the Lord. In whom you also are built together into a habitation of God in the Spirit*** (Eph 2:21–22). *You are God’s building* (1 Cor 3:9). All this occurs ***in*** the ***charity*** of which it is said that *charity edifies* (1 Cor 8:1).  

Or, God accomplishes all this ***in charity***, that is, simply out of love. *Yea, I have loved you with an everlasting love: therefore have I drawn you, taking pity on you. And I will build you again, and you shall be built* (Jer 31:3–4). This is what he states in ***unto the edifying of itself in charity***.
