# Lecture 8 — Husbands and wives

***^5:22^ Let women be subject to their husbands, as to the Lord: [n. 317]***

> ^5:23^ Because the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the Church. He is the savior of his body. [n. 318]

> ^5:24^ Therefore as the Church is subject to Christ: so also let the wives be to their husbands in all things.

> ^5:25^ Husbands, love your wives, as Christ also loved the Church and delivered himself up for it: [n. 319]

> ^5:26^ That he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the laver of water in the Word of life: [n. 323]

> ^5:27^ That he might present it to himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. [n. 324]

> **316**. Up until now the Apostle has set down general precepts applicable to everyone, and at this point he expresses those which pertain to particular persons or classes. According to the Philosopher in the *Politics*, a home must possess three relationships if it is to be complete, namely, that of the husband and wife, of the father and the children, and that between the master and his servants. Hence these three are dealt with when the Apostle instructs:

first, the husband and wife;  

second, the father and child, at ***children, obey*** (Eph 6:1);  

third, the servants and masters, at ***slaves, be obedient*** (Eph 6:5).  

The first has two divisions:  

first, he cautions the women to be subject;  

second, he admonishes the men to love, at ***husbands, love***.  

The first is again twofold:  

first, he gives an admonition;  

second, he explains the reason for it, at ***because the husband is the head***.  

**317**. Hence he states: ***let women be subject to their husbands*** because *a woman, if she have superiority, is contrary to her husband* (Sir 25:30). So he especially warns them about subjection. This is ***as to a lord*** since the relation of a husband to his wife is, in a certain way, like that of a master to his servant, insofar as the latter ought to be governed by the commands of his master. The difference between these two relationships is that the master employs his servants in whatever is profitable to himself; but a husband treats his wife and children in reference to the common good. Thus he mentions ***as to a lord***; the husband is not really a lord, but is as a lord. *Let wives be subject to their husbands* (1 Pet 3:1).  

**318**. Next, he adds his reason; regarding it he makes three points: first, he offers it for consideration; second, he introduces an example, at ***as Christ***; third, from the example he draws his conclusion, at ***as the Church***.  

The reason for this subjection is that the husband is the head of the wife, and the sense of sight is localized in the head—*the eyes of a wise man are in his head* (Eccl 2:14)—and hence a husband ought to govern his wife as her head. *The head of the woman is the man* (1 Cor 11:3).  

Then he brings in his example when he says: ***as Christ is the head of the Church***. God ***has made him head over all the Church, which is his body*** (Eph 1:22–23). This is not for his own utility, but for that of the Church since ***he is the savior of his body***. *For there is no other name under heaven given to men, whereby we must be saved* (Acts 4:12). *Behold, God is my savior; I will deal confidently and will not fear* (Isa 12:2). From this he draws the conclusion he intended, saying ***therefore, as the Church is subject to Christ***. As though he said: it is not proper for an organ to rebel against its head in any situation; but as Christ is head of the Church in his own way, so a husband is the head of his wife; therefore the wife must be obedient to her husband ***as the Church is subject to Christ***. *Shall not my soul be subject to God?* (Ps 62:1), ***so also let the wives be to their husbands***. *And you shall be under your husband’s power* (Gen 3:16), ***in all things*** which are not contrary to God, since *we ought to obey God rather than men* (Acts 5:29).  

**319**. After this, at ***husbands, love your wives***, he admonishes the husbands that they are to love their wives.  

First, he does this.  

Second, he gives his reason, at ***as Christ***.  

**320**. He states: ***husbands, love your wives***. For certainly it is from the love he has for his wife that he will live more chastely and both of them will enjoy a peaceful relationship. If he should love another more than his own wife, he exposes himself and his wife to division. *Husbands, love your wives and be not bitter towards them* (Col 3:19).  

**321**. He then treats of the threefold reason for this.  

First, he draws one reason from the example of Christ, at ***as Christ***;  

second, another one from the husband himself, at ***he who loves his wife*** (Eph 5:28);  

third, another from a divine commandment, at ***for this cause shall a man leave*** (Eph 5:31).  

Concerning the first he does three things:  

first, he offers the example of Christ’s love;  

second, he shows the sign of that love, at ***and delivered himself up***;  

third, finally he deduces his intended conclusion, at ***so also ought men*** (Eph 5:28).  

**322**. Thus he says: ***as Christ also loved the Church***; ***be therefore followers of God, as most dear children; and walk in love, as Christ also has loved us and has delivered himself for us*** (Eph 5:1–2).  

**323**. The sign of Christ’s love for the Church is that ***he delivered himself up for it***. *The Son of God who loved me and delivered himself for me* (Gal 2:20). *He has delivered his soul unto death* (Isa 53:12).  

And for what? ***That he might sanctify it***: *wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate* (Heb 13:12). *Sanctify them in truth* (John 17:17). That is the effect of Christ’s death.  

**324**. As a result of this sanctification he cleanses it from the stains of sin. Hence he adds ***cleansing it by the laver of water***. This washing has a power from the passion of Christ. *All we who are baptized in Christ Jesus are baptized in his death; for we are buried together with him by baptism into death* (Rom 6:3–4). *And I will pour upon you clean water and you shall be cleansed from all your filthiness* (Ezek 36:25). *There shall be a fountain open to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; for the washing of the sinner and of the unclean woman* (Zech 13:1). This occurs ***in the Word of life*** which, coming upon the water, gives it the power to cleanse: *going, therefore, teach all nations; baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit* (Matt 28:19).  

The goal of this sanctifying action is the Church’s purity. Thus he states ***that he might present it to himself, a glorious Church***; as if the Apostle said: it would be highly improper for the immaculate bridegroom to wed a soiled bride. This is why he presents her to himself in an immaculate state, now through grace and in the future through glory. Regarding the latter, he says ***glorious*** by the clarity of both body and soul. For *he will reform the body of our lowness, made like to the body of his glory* (Phil 3:21). Hence he adds ***not having spot***: *the man that walked in the perfect way, he served me* (Ps 101:6); *blessed are the undefiled in the way: who walk in the law of the Lord* (Ps 119:1). ***Or wrinkle*** refers to the lack of suffering since, as it is written: *they shall no more hunger nor thirst* (Rev 7:16), ***or any such thing, but that it should be holy*** through its confirmation in grace, ***and without*** the ***blemish*** of any defilement.  

Thus all of these characteristics can be understood of the appearance of the Church in the future through glory. But if they are taken to refer to her appearance through faith, then he would be saying: ***that he might present to himself***, through faith, ***a glorious Church***, since *it is a great glory to follow the Lord* (Sir 23:38), ***not having*** a ***spot*** of mortal sin. *You are stained in your iniquity* (Jer 2:22). Nor does it have a ***wrinkle***, that is, a duplicity of purpose which those who are rightly united with Christ and the Church do not have. *My wrinkles bear witness against me* (Job 16:9). ***But*** rather ***that it should be holy*** through its intention and ***without blemish*** through every kind of purity.  

From the above he, in the third place, draws the conclusion he intended by affirming: ***so also ought men to love their wives as their own bodies* **(Eph 5:28).
