# Article 3

THE third point of inquiry is whether there can be a person in God: and seemingly the reply should be in the negative.

1. According to Boethius (*De Duab. Nat.*) the word *person* is taken from *personating*, for masked men were called persons, because they personated something in comedies and tragedies. But it is unbecoming for God to be masked except perhaps metaphorically speaking. Therefore the term person should not be applied to God except perhaps metaphorically.

2. As Damascene says (*De Fide Orth.* i, 1, 2, 4), it is impossible for us to know what any of the things are which we ascribe to God, as regards the sense in which they apply to him. Yet what a person is we know by the above-given definition (A. 2). Therefore *person* is not applicable to God, at least in the sense of the aforesaid definition.

3. God is not in a genus: because since he is infinite he cannot be confined within the limits of any genus. Now *person* signifies something in the genus of substance. Therefore *person* is not to be applied to God.

4. There is no composition in God. But *person* signifies something composite: for an individual of human nature, which is a person, is extremely composite: besides, the parts of the definition of *person* show that *person is* a composite thing. Therefore there is no person in God.

5. There is no matter in God. But matter is the principle of individuation. Since then a person is an individual substance, the term cannot be applied to God.

6. Every person is a subsistence. But God cannot be called a subsistence, for he is not subject to anything. Therefore he is not a person.

7. Person is comprised under hypostasis. Now there cannot be a hypostasis in God, since there are no accidents in him, and *hypostasis* denotes the subject of an accident as stated above (A. i). Therefore there is no person in God.

The contrary is plain from the authority of Athanasius in the Creed, *Quicumque vult,* etc., and of Augustine (*De Trin.* vii, 6), and from the general usage of the Church who being taught of the Holy Spirit cannot err.

I answer that, as stated above, *person* denotes a certain nature with a certain mode of existence. Now the nature which *person* includes in its definition is of all natures the most exalted, to wit that nature which is intellectual in regard to its genus. Likewise the mode of existence signified by the word *person* is most exalted, namely that a thing exists by itself. Since then whatsoever is most excellent in creatures should be attributed to God, it is becoming that the word *person* should be attributed to God, even as other terms which are said of God properly.

*Reply to the First Objection.* Two things must be considered in a name: that which it is intended to signify, and that from which it is taken for the purpose of signification. For a name is often given to signify a certain thing, but is taken from an accident or an action or an effect of that thing, and yet these are not the chief signification of the name which denotes rather the very substance or nature of the thing. Thus the word lapis (stone) is taken from *laesio pedis* (hurting the foot), yet it does not signify this, but rather a body wherein such an accident is frequently found: so that *laesio pedis* belongs to the etymology of the word *lapis* rather than to its meaning. Accordingly when it is not the intended signification of a term that is appropriate to God, but some property by way of likeness, then such a term is applied to God metaphorically. Thus God is called a lion, not that the lion’s nature is to be attributed to God, but on account of the lion’s strength. When, however, that which the term signifies is appropriate to God, it is applied to God in its proper sense, for instance, good, wise and the like, although sometimes the source from which such terms are taken is not applicable to God. Thus although to personate as a masked man, whence comes the term *person, is* not to be attributed to God, yet that which the word signifies, namely *that which subsists in an intellectual nature* is appropriate to God: and for this reason the term *person* is ascribed to God in its proper sense.

*Reply to the Second Objection.* Both the word *person* and the definition of person given above are applicable to God: not however, so as to be a definition of God, since there is more in God than is signified by the term. Hence the definition of the term does not define what God is.

*Reply to the Third Objection.* Although God is not in the genus of substance as a species, he belongs to the genus of substance as the principle of the genus.

*Reply to the Fourth Objection.* It is accidental to *person* as such that it is composite, because the complement or perfection required for personality is not to be found at once in one simple thing, but requires a combination of several, as is to be observed in men. But in God together with supreme simplicity there is supreme perfection: wherefore in him there is *person* without composition. As to the parts which combine to make. the definition of *person* they do not argue composition in *person* except in material substances: and *individual,* being a negation, does not imply composition through being added to substance. Hence the only composition that remains is that of individual substance, i.e. hypostasis with the nature: which two in immaterial substances are absolutely one and the same thing.

*Reply to the Fifth Objection.* In material things whose forms are not self-subsistent but adherent to matter the principle of individuation must needs come from matter: whereas immaterial forms, being self-subsistent, are individualized by themselves, because from the very fact that a thing is self-subsistent, it cannot be predicated of several. Consequently there is no reason why there should not be an individual substance and a person in immaterial things.

*Reply to the Sixth Objection.* Although there is no composition in God by reason whereof we might be able to understand subjection of one thing to another in him, nevertheless by an act of the mind we consider his being apart from his substance as subject to his being, and from this point of view call it subsistence.

*Reply to the Seventh Objection.* Though there are no accidents in God, there are personal properties of which the hypostases are the subjects.

## Q. IX:

ARTICLE IV

In God Does the Term ‘Person’ Signify Something Relative Or Something Absolute?**

[ *Sum. Th.* I, Q. xxix, A. 4]
