# Chapter 1 — DE MIXTIONE ELEMENTORUM

There is usually a question among many men how the elements exist in a blend.

Now it seems to certain ones that the substantial forms of the elements remain, with the active and passive qualities of the elements having been reduced somehow to a mean through alteration.

For if the substantial forms do not remain, there will seem to be a corruption of certain elements, and not a blend.

On the other hand, if the substantial form of the blended body be the act of matter, with the forms of the simple bodies not having been presupposed, the simple bodies would lose the notion of elements.

For an element is [that] from which something is primarily composed, and it is in that [something], and it is indivisible according to species.

For with the substantial forms having been withdrawn, the blended body is not then composed from the simple bodies such that they would remain in it.

But it is impossible that they exist this way.

For it is impossible that matter admit the different forms of the elements in the same respect.

Therefore, if in a blended body the substantial forms of the elements be preserved, they must be present in diverse parts of matter.

However, it is impossible that diverse parts of matter receive [these forms] unless through the quantity in matter having been pre-understood.

For when the quantity has been withdrawn, the substance remains indivisible, as is clear in I *Physics* [185b 16].

Now a physical body is constituted out of matter under existing quantity and through the arriving substantial form.

Therefore, the diverse parts of matter subsisting by means of the forms of the elements admits the notion of many bodies.

But it is impossible that [a thing] be many bodies at the same time.

Therefore, the four elements will not be in any part of the blended body whatever;

and thus there will not be a blend in truth, but according to sense, just as happens in the aggregation of bodies imperceptible because of [their] smallness.

Furthermore, every substantial form requires a proper disposition in matter, without which it is not able to be;

whence the way towards generation and corruption is alteration.

But it is impossible that the proper disposition which is required for the form of fire, and the proper disposition which is required for the form of water should come together in the same thing, because according to such dispositions fire and water are contraries.

Now it is impossible that contraries be in the same thing.

Therefore, it is impossible that the substantial forms of fire and water be in the same part of the blend.

Therefore, if the blend is made when the substantial forms of the simple bodies remain, it follows that it is not a blend in truth, but only to sense, as it were, when the juxtaposed parts are imperceptible because of their smallness.

Some, however, wishing to avoid both accounts, have fallen into more unfitting [ones].

For in order that they might distinguish the blending from the corruption of the elements, they said that the substantial forms of the elements somehow remain in the blend.

But on the other hand, lest they should be forced to say that it is only a blend to sense, and not according to truth, they maintained that the forms of the elements do not remain in the blend according to their entirety but are reduced into some mean.

For they say that the forms of the elements admit of more and less, and they have contrariety to one another.

But because this is manifestly repugnant to common opinion and to the statement of Aristotle saying in the Categories [5 (3b 24)] that nothing is contrary to substance, and that it does not admit of more and less,

they go on further, saying that the forms of the elements are most imperfect, as [they are] nearer to prime matter.

Hence they are middles between substantial and accidental forms.

And thus, insofar as they approach to the nature of accidental forms, they are able to admit of more and less.

This position, however, is multiply improbable.

First, indeed, because to be a certain mean between substance and accident is wholly impossible;

for there would be some mean between affirmation and negation.

For it is proper to an accident to be in a subject, but to a substance not to be in a subject.

Substantial forms, however, are in fact in matter, but not in a subject;

for a subject is a "this something", but a substantial form is what makes a "this something" —it does not, however, presuppose it.

Likewise, it is ridiculous to say that the mean is something between those which are not of one genus, as is proved in X. *Metaphysics* [7 (1057a 20)].

For the mean and extremes must be from the same genus.

Nothing, therefore, is able to be a mean between substance and accident.

Furthermore, it is impossible that the substantial forms of the elements admit of more and less.

For every form admitting of more and less is divisible per accidens, inasmuch as, namely, the subject can partake of it either more or less.

However, it happens that a motion is continuous according as something is divisible per se or per accidens, as is clear in VI. *Physics* [1 (231b 15)].

For there is change of place and augmentation and dimunition according to quantity and place which are divisible per se; but alteration [is] according to qualities which admit of more and less, such as hot and white.

Therefore, if the forms of the elements admit of more and less, both the generation and corruption of the elements will be a continuous motion, which is impossible.

For motion is not continuous except in three genera, namely, in quantity and quality, and where, as is proved in V. *Physics* [1 (225b9)].

Furthermore, every difference according to substantial form variegates the species.

But that which receives more and less distinguishes what is more from that which is less and which in some way is contrary to it, such as the more white and the less white.

If, then, the form of fire admits of more and less, the more having been made or the less having been made, it will variegate the species, and it will not be the same form, but another.

And this is what the Philosopher says in VIII. *Metaphysics* [3 (1043b 36)], that just as in numbers the species is variegated through addition and subtraction, so also in substances.

Therefore, one must find another way by which both the truth of blends is preserved and yet the elements are not totally corrupted but, in some way, remain in the blend.

It ought to be considered, therefore, that the active and passive qualities of the elements are contraries to each other, and they receive of more and less.

Now a medium quality can be constituted from contrary qualities which receive of more and less, which are flavored with the nature of both extremes, such as gray between white and black, and tepid between hot and cold.

So, then, by remitting the greatest qualities of the elements, there is constituted from out of these qualities some medium quality which is the proper quality of the blended body, differing nevertheless in diverse things according to the diverse proportion of the blend.

And this quality is, in fact, the proper disposition for the form of the blended body, just as the simple quality is for the form of the simple body.

Therefore, just as the extremes are found in the mean, which partakes of the nature of both, so the qualities of the simple body are found in the proper quality of the blended body.

The quality of the simple body, however, is indeed other than the substantial form itself; nevertheless, it acts in virtue of the substantial form.

Otherwise, the hot would only heat, but the substantial form would not be educed into act through its action, since nothing acts beyond its own species.

So, therefore, the virtues of the substantial forms of the simple bodies are preserved in the blended bodies.

Therefore, the forms of the elements are in blended bodies, not indeed by act, but by virtue:

and this is what Aristotle says in I. *De Generatione* [10 (327b 30)]: "Therefore, the elements evidently do not remain in the blend by act, as body and white do; nor are they corrupted, neither the other nor both: for their virtue is preserved."

First, a word about my method of translation. Wherever possible, I try to avoid interpretation by strictly following the Latin text, even if that means giving unnatural english expressions. Less of a translation, this is meant to be an aid to the reader who wishes to tackle the Latin, but who is not altogether confident in his own Latin grammar and vocabulary. With this end, I have divided the text up into 60 phrases, each individually translated into English.

Only a few points of the translation might require explanation. First of all, one may wonder why I have translated " *mixtio* " as "blend" throughout this work since there are several more common translations which one could use, such as "mixture" and "compound." I have preferred "blend," however, since it seems closer to the meaning of the doctrine of St. Thomas. It calls to mind something like the painter's blending of colors, wherein a medium is achieved which shares some of the powers of each of the colors blended. The reader ought to be aware of this bit of interpretation on my part, and verify for himself whether "blend" is the best word-choice here.

I think that the problem with using the transliteration "mixture" is that it has a different meaning than " *mixtio* " as it is used in this context. The modern usage of "mixture," especially amongst chemists, corresponds to what Aquinas would call "non vera mixtio sed solum ad sensum." Examples of this would be a mixture of iron filings and sand. The components remain distinct in truth, though they appear to combine.

I think that "compound" is closer than "mixture" to " *mixtio* " in Aquinas' sense, but it carries certain nuances that " *mixtio* " does not. When a chemical is called a compound, it implies that the parts continue to exist in some other ways in addition to power. For example, when the chemist says that water is compounded of hydrogen and oxygen, he implies not only that these elements go into the makeup of the new unity, which unity retains certain powers of the components, but that the compound retains a certain heterogeneity of parts whose parts have some of the properties corresponding to the those of the original components. Thus, when a college student calls something a compound, e.g. water, he imagines a mickey mouse head, with the ears being more hydrogen-like and the face more oxygen-like. This modern understanding of chemical unity, where the components are like the organs of the whole, may not be inconsistent with the doctrine of Aquinas, but I think it would be inaccurate to imply Aquinas was intending this notion by transLating " *mixtio* " as "compound."

In any case, I think "blend" is better than either of the alternatives which occurred to me.

I debated how I ought to translate to few instances of "virtus." In my first draft, I preferred "power," as did my proof reader, (despite a possible ambiguity with " *potestas* ",) but while I was studying another Latin text which used " *virtus* " in a similar context, (sci. " *De Occultis Operibus Naturae*,") I decided that "virtue" was a better translation, since it retained the equivocation of the Latin and the association with excellence that this implied. I changed my translation here, but I hesitate nonetheless, since in many circles "virtue" is primarily understood to mean a Victorian woman's chastity, and not manly excellence nor power, as it does in the Latin or Greek.

I have tried as much as possible to be literal, so as to avoid too much interpretation, even when the correct sense seemed clear. This is difficult, especially for constructions like the ablative absolute. One can translate these into English using the preposition "by" and the perfect passive particle, but it is not a natural construction in English. My personal preference is to torture the English so as to leave the interpretation up to the reader, but I received so many objections from my proof reader for indulging in this, that I have not always followed my preferences in this version.

Finally, I decided not to footnote the text. I was tempted to identify the various objections with Avicenna et al. in footnotes, and reference the parallel texts, but decided that this might distract a student from the argument. A parallel passage in the *Summa* can be referred to should the student wish to identify these objectors. Since Aquinas himself supplements his arguments with those of Aristotle, and refers to his works, I did take the liberty to suggest in square brackets the exact place in the text of Aristotle of which Aquinas is thinking. Eventually, I hope to hypertext link all these references.

In any case, I offer this translation for your use. Since the Latin is next to the English, it is very easy to check the translation against the original, and alter it as one prefers, e.g. changing the rarely used adverb "multiply" in line 31 to "in many ways", or the particle "saying" in line 27 to "who says". The Latin is not difficult and minor changes could easily be made. If greater changes are needed, the reader should be free to make them, e.g. if one preferred to have the Latin in a column beside the English, or if one wanted the Latin removed altogether, or if one wanted a more idiomatic English construction. The reader need simply download the electronic text and make one's own private changes. If the reader thinks that some portion of the translation is misleading, however, or correct, but overinterpreted, he can readily reach me by e-mail and suggest the corrections.

Peter Orlowski
