# Article 26

In the twenty-sixth article, This article, including the response is identical to *De 30 Articulis,* a. 20. The response to the same question is different in *De 43 Articulis,* a. 33. the question is raised whether the statement that the *material of the semen* 'Corpus Spermatis.' In view of the Greek of which this is a translation (see the following footnote), it seems best to take the 'spermatis' as a dative of possession. Literally, then, "the sperm's body/material part. *that the spirit (the power of the soul's beginning) goes out with is separate from the body and is a divine thing that, as such, is called the intellect,* This is an incomplete translation of book two of Aristotle's *On the Generation of Animals* of Aristotle (chapter 3, 737 a 7). The complete text reads: Τὸ δὲ τῆς γονῆς σῶμα, ἐν ᾧ συναπέρχεται [τὸ σπέρμα] τὸ τῆς ψυχικῆς ἀρχῆς, τὸ μὲν χωριστὸν ὂν σώματος, ὅσοις ἐμπεριλαμβάνεταί τι θεῖον (τοιοῦτος δ᾿ ἐστὶν ὁ καλούμενος νοῦς). can or ought to be explained as follows: that the spirit or generative power is called the intellect by way of likeness because as the intellect operates without an organ, so also does a power.  

The Commentator [Averroes] puts forward this explanation while commenting on these words from the seventh book of the *Metaphysics*: *therefore as it is said that in substances, the principle is*. He says, *for that reason, Aristotle says in* De Animalibus *that the powers that are in the semen are like the intellect because they act by the activity of the intellect and powers do not act by a bodily instrument*. Averroes on VII *Metaph.* comm. 31 (ed. Venetiis 1552, vol. VIII, fol. 85 va 18-21).
