# Lecture 1

***1. When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.***

> 2. And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, “Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.”

> 3. And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, “I will; be thou clean.” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.

> 4. And Jesus said unto him, “See thou tell no man; but go thy way, show thyself to the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.”

> Jerome After the preaching and teaching, is offered an occasion of working miracles, that by mighty works following, the preceding doctrine might be confirmed.

Pseudo-Chrys. Because He taught them as one having authority, that He might not thence be supposed to use this method of teaching from ostentation, He does the same in works, as one having power to cure; and therefore, “When Jesus descended from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.”  

Pseudo-Origen, Hom. in Liv. 5 While the Lord taught on the mount, the disciples were with Him, for to them it was given to know the secret things of the heavenly doctrine; but now as He came down from the mount the crowds followed Him, who had been altogether unable to ascent into the mount. They that are bowed by the burden of sin cannot climb to the sublime mysteries. But when the Lord came down from the mount, that is, stooped to the infirmity, and helplessness of the rest, in pity to their imperfections, “great multitudes followed Him,” some for renown, most for His doctrine, some for cures, or having their wants administered to.  

Haymo Otherwise; By the mount on which the Lord sat is figured the Heaven, as it is written, “Heaven is my throne.” (Isa 66:1) But when the Lord sits on the mount, only the disciples come to Him; because before He took on Him the frailty of our human nature, God was known only in Judaea *(margin note: Ps 76:1)*; but when He came down from the height of his Divinity, and took upon Him the frailty of our human nature, a great multitude of the nations followed Him. Herein it is shown to them that teach that their speech should be so regulated, that as they see each man is able to receive, they should so speak the word of God. For the doctors ascend the mountain, when they show the more excellent precepts to the perfect; they come down from the mount, in showing the lesser precepts to the weak.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Among others who were not able to ascent into the mount was the leper, as bearing the burden of sin; for the sin of our souls is a leprosy. And the Lord came down from the height of heaven, as from a mountain, that He might purge the leprousness of our sin; and so the leper as already prepared meets Him as He came down.  

Pseudo-Origen He works the cures below, and does none in the mount; for there is a time for all things under heaven, a time for teaching, and a time for healing. On the mount He taught, He cured souls, He healed hearts; which being finished, as He came down from the heavenly heights to heal bodies, there came to Him a leper and made adoration to Him; before he made his suit, he began to adore, showing his great reverence.  

Pseudo-Chrys. He did not ask it of Him as of a human physician, but adored Him as God. For faith and confession make a perfect prayer; so that the leprous man in adoring fulfilled the work of faith, and the work of confession in words, “he make adoration to him, saying;”  

Pseudo-Origen Lord, by Thee all things were made, Thou therefore, “if thou will, canst make me clean.” Thy will is the work, and all works are subject to Thy will. Thou of old cleansedst Naaman the Syrian of his leprosy by the hand of Elisha, and now, “if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.”  

Chrys. He said not, If Thou wilt ask of God, or, If Thou wilt make adoration to God; but, “If thou wilt.” Nor did he say, Lord, cleanse me; but left all to Him, thereby making Him Lord and attributing to Him the power over all.  

Pseudo-Chrys. And thus he rewarded a spiritual Physician with a spiritual reward; for as physicians are gained by money, so He with prayer. We offer to God nothing more worthy than faithful prayer. In that he say, “If thou wilt,” there is no doubt that Christ’s will is ready to every good work; but only doubt whether that cure would be expedient for him, because soundness of body is not good for all. “If thou wilt” then is as much as to say, I believe that Thou willest whatever is good, but I know not if this that I desire for myself is good.  

Chrys. He was able to cleanse by a word, or even by mere will, but He put out His hand, “He stretched forth his hand and touched him,” to show that He was not subject to the Law, and that to the pure nothing is impure. Elisha truly kept the Law in all strictness, and did not go out and touch Naaman, but sends him to wash in Jordan. But the Lord shows that He does not heal as a servant, but as Lord heals and touches; His hand was not made unclean by the leprosy, but the leprous body was made pure by the holy hand. For He came not only to heal bodies, but to lead a soul to the true wisdom. And then He did not forbid to eat with unwashen hands, so here He teaches us that it is the leprosy of the soul we ought only to dread, which is sin, but that the leprosy of the body is no impediment to virtue.  

Pseudo-Chrys. But though He transgressed the letter of the Law, He did not transgress its meaning. For the Law forbade to touch leprosy, because it could not hinder that the touch should not defile; therefore it meant not that lepers should not be healed, but that they that touched should not be polluted. So He was not polluted by touching the leprosy, but purified the leprosy by touching it.  

Damascenus, De Fid. Orth. iii. 15 For He was not only God, but man also, whence He wrought Divine wonders by touch and word; for as by an instrument so by His body the Divine acts were done.  

Chrys. But for touching the leprous man there is none that accuses Him, because His hearers were not yet seized with envy against Him.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Had He healed him without speaking, who would know by whose power he had been healed? So the will to heal was for the sake of the leprous man; the word was for the sake of them that beheld, therefore He said, “I will, be thou clean.”  

Jerome It is not to be read, as most of the Latins think, ‘I will cleanse thee;’ but separately, He first answers, “I will,” and then follows the command, “be thou clean.” The leper has said, “If thou wilt;” The Lord answers, “I will;” he first said, “Thou canst make me clean;” the Lord spake, “Be thou clean.”  

Chrys. No where else do we see Him using this word though He be working ever so signal a miracle; but He here adds, “I will,” to confirm the opinion of the people and the leprous man concerning His power.  

Nature obeyed the word of the Purifier with proper sped, whence it follows, “and straight his leprosy was cleansed.” But even this word, “straightway,” is too slow to express the speed with which the deed was done.  

Pseudo-Origen Because he was not slow to believe, his cure is not delayed; he did not linger in his confession, Christ did not linger in His cure.  

Aug., De. Cons. Evan., ii, 19 Luke has mentioned the cleansing of this leper, though not in the same order of events, but as his manner is to recollect things omitted, and to put first things that were done later, as they were divinely suggested; so that what they had known before, they afterwards set down in writing when they were recalled to their minds.  

Chrys. Jesus when healing his body bids him tell no man; “Jesus saith unto him, See thou tell no man.” Some say that He gave this command that they might, not through malice distrust his cure. But this is said foolishly, for He did not so cure him as that his purity should be called in question: but He bids him “tell no man,” to teach that He does not love ostentation and glory. How is it then that to another to whom He had healed He gives command to go and tell it? What He taught in that was only that we should have a thankful heart; for He does not command that it should be published abroad, but that glory should be given to God. He teaches us then through this leper not to be desirous of empty honor; by the other, not to be ungrateful, but to refer all things to the praise of God.  

Jerome And in truth what need was there that he should proclaim with his mouth what was evidently showed in his body?  

Hilary Or that this healing might be sought rather than offered, therefore silence is enjoined.  

Jerome He sends him to the Priests, first, because of His humility that He may seem to defer to the Priests; second, that when they saw the leper cleansed they might be saved, if they would believe on the Savior, or if not that they might be without excuse; and lastly, that He might not seem, as He was often charged, to be infringing the Law.  

Chrys. He neither every where broke, nor every where observed, the Law, but sometimes the one, sometimes the other. The one was preparing the way for the wisdom that was to come, the other was silencing the irreverent tongue of the Jews, and condescending to their weakness. Whence the Apostles also are seen sometimes observing, sometimes neglecting, the Law.  

Pseudo-Origen Or, He sends him to the Priests that they might know that he was not cleansed according to the manner of the Law, but by the operation of grace.  

Jerome It was ordained in the Law, that those that had been cleansed of a leprosy should offer gifts to the Priests; as it follows, “And offer thy gift as Moses commanded for a testimony to them.”  

Pseudo-Chrys. Which is not to be understood, “Moses commanded it for a testimony to them;” but, “Go thou and offer for a testimony.”  

Chrys. For Christ, knowing beforehand that they would not profit by this, said not, ‘for their amendment,’ but, “for a testimony to them;” that is, for an accusation of them, and in attestation that all things that should have been done by Me, have been done. But though He thus knew that they would not profit by it, yet He did not omit any thing that behoved to be done; but they remained in their former ill-will. Also He said not, ‘The gift that I command,’ but, “that Moses commanded,” that in the meantime He might hand them over to the Law, and close the mouths of the unjust. That they might not say that He usurped the honor of the Priests, He fulfilled the work of the Law, and made a trial of them.  

Pseudo-Origen Or; “offer thy gift,” that all who see may believe the miracle.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Or; He command the oblation, that should they afterwards seek to put him out, he might be able to say, You have received gifts on my cleansing, how do ye now cast me out as a leper?  

Hilary Or we may read, “Which Moses commanded for a testimony;” inasmuch as what Moses commanded in the Law is a testimony, not an effect.  

Bede, Hom. in Dom., 3 Epiph. Should any be perplexed how, when the Lord seems here to approve Moses’ offering, the Church does not receive it, let him remember, that Christ had not yet offered His body for a holocaust. And it behoved that the typical sacrifices should not be taken away, before that which they typified was established by the testimony of the Apostles’ preaching, and by the faith of the people believing. By this man was figured the whole human race, for he was not only leprous, but, according to the Gospel of Luke, is described as full of leprosy. “For all have sinned, and need glory of God;” to wit, that glory, that the hand of the Savior being stretched out, (that is, the Word being made flesh), and touching human nature, they might be cleansed from the vanity of their former ways; and that they that had been long abominable, and cast out from the camp of God’s people, might be restored to the temple and the priest, and be able to offer their bodies a living sacrifice to Him to whom it is said, “Thou art a Priest for ever.” (Ps 110:4)  

Remig. Morally; by the leper is signified the sinner; for sin makes an unclean and impure soul; he falls down before Christ when he is confounded concerning his former sins; yet he ought to confess, and to seek the remedy of penitence; so the leper shows his disease, and asks a cure. The Lord stretches out His hand when He affords the aid of Divine mercy; whereupon follows immediately remission of sin; nor ought the Church to be reconciled to the same, but on the sentence of the Priest.
