# Lecture 6

27. And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and saying, “Thou Son of David, have mercy on us.”  

> 28. And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus saith unto them, “Believe ye that I am able to do this?” They said unto him, “Yea, Lord.”

> 29. Then touched he their eyes, saying, “According to your faith be it unto you.”

> 30. And their eyes were opened and Jesus straitly charged them, saying, “See that no man know it.”

> 31. But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that country.

> Jerome The miracles that had gone before of the ruler’s daughter, and the woman with the issue of blood, are now followed by that of two blind men, that what death and disease had there witnessed, that blindness might now witness. “And as Jesus passed thence,” that is, from the ruler’s house, there followed him two blind men, crying, and saying, Have mercy on us, thou Son of David.”

Chrys., Hom., xxxii Here is no small charge against the Jews, that these men, having lost their sight, yet believe by means of their hearing only; while they who had sight, would not believe the miracles that were done. Observe their eagerness; they do not simply come to Him, but with crying, and asking for nothing but mercy; they call Him Son of David because that seemed to be a name of honor.  

Remig. Rightly they call Him Son of David, because the Virgin Mary was of the line of David.  

Jerome Let Marcion and Manichaeaus, and the other heretics who mangle the Old Testament, hear this, and learn that the Savior is called the Son of David; for if He was not born in the flesh, how is He the Son of David?  

Chrys. Observe that the Lord oftentimes desired to be asked to heal, that none should think that He was eager to seize an occasion of display.  

Jerome Yet were they not healed by the way-side and in passing as they had thought to be; but when He was entered into the house, they come unto Him; and first their faith is made proof of, that so they may receive the light of the true faith. “And when he was come into the house, the blind men came unto him; and Jesus said unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this?”  

Chrys. Here again He teaches us to exclude the desire of fame; because there was a house hard by, He takes them there to heal them apart.  

Remig. He who was able to give sight to the blind, was not ignorant whether they believed; but He asked them, in order that the faith which they bare in their hearts, being confessed by their mouth might be made deserving of a higher reward, according to that of the Apostle, “By the mouth of confession is made unto salvation.” (Rom 10:10)  

Chrys. And not for this reason only, but that He might make manifest that they were worthy of healing, and that none might object, that if mercy alone saved, then ought all to be saved. Therefore also He requires faith of them, that He may thereby raise their thoughts higher; they had called Him the Son of David, therefore He instructs them that they should think higher things of Him. Thus He does not say to them, Believe ye that I can ask the Father? But, “Believe ye that I am able to do this? They say unto him, Yea. Lord.” They call Him no more Son of David, but exalt Him higher, and confess His dominion. Then He lays His hand upon them; as it follows, “Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you.” This He says confirming their faith, and testifying that what they had said were not words of flattery. Then follows the cure, “And their eyes were opened.” And after this, He injunction that they should tell it to no man; and this not a simple command, but with much earnestness, “And Jesus straitly charged them, saying, See that no man know it; but they went forth, and spread abroad the fame of him through the whole country.”  

Jerome The Lord from humility shunning the fame of His glorious works, gave them this charge, and they from gratitude cannot be silent respecting so great benefit.  

Chrys. That He said to another man, “Go, and proclaim the glory of God, (Luke 8:39) is not contrary to this; for what He would teach is, that we should hinder those that would commend us for ourselves. But when it is the Lord’s glory that is to be praised, we ought not to forbid, but to promote it ourselves.  

Hilary Or He enjoins silence on the blind men, because to preach was the Apostles’ office.  

Greg., Mor., xix, 23 We must enquire how this is that the Almighty, whose will and power are coextensive, should have here willed that His excellent works should be hid in silence, and is yet preached against His will, as it were, by these men who have received their sight. It is only that He herein has left an example to His servants who follow Him, that they should desire their own good deeds to be hid, and that notwithstanding they should be made known against their will, that others may profit by their example. They should then be hid by design, and published of compulsion; their concealment is by our own watchfulness, their betrayal is for others’ profit.  

Remig. Allegorically; By these two blind men are denoted the two nations of Jews and Gentiles, or the two nations of the Jewish race; for in the time of Rohoam his kingdom was split into two parts. Out of both nations such as believed on Him Christ gave sight to in the house, by which is understood the Church; for without the unity of the Church no man can be saved. And they of the Jews who had believed the Lord’s coming spread the knowledge thereof throughout the whole earth.  

Rabanus The house of the ruler is the Synagogue which was ruled by Moses; the house of Jesus is the heavenly Jerusalem. As the Lord passed through this world and was returning to His own house, two blind men followed Him; that is, when the Gospel was preached by the Apostles, many of the Jews and Gentiles began to follow Him. But when He ascended into Heaven, then He entered His house, that is, into the confession of one faith which is in the Catholic Church, and in that they were enlightened.
