# Lecture 5

23. And when Jesus came into the ruler’s house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise,  

> 24. He said unto them, “Give place; for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth.” And they laughed him to scorn.

> 25. But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose.

> 26. And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.

> Gloss., non occ. After the healing of the woman with the issue of blood, follows the raising of the dead; “And when Jesus was come into the ruler’s house.”

Chrys. We may suppose that He proceeded slowly, and spake longer to the woman whom He had healed, that He might suffer the maid to die, and thus an evident miracle of restoring to life might be wrought. In the case of Lazarus also He waited till the third day. “And when he saw the minstrels and the people making a noise;” this was a proof of her death.  

Ambrose., Ambrosiaster, in Luc., 8, 52 For by the ancient custom minstrels were engaged to make lamentation for the dead.  

Chrys. But Christ put forth all the pipers, but took in the parents, that it might not be said that He had healed her by any other means; and before the restoring to life He excites their expectations by His words, “And he said, Give place: for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth.”  

Bede, in Luc. As though He had said, To you she is dead, but to God who has power to give life, she sleeps only both in soul and body.  

Chrys. By this saying, He soothes the minds of those that were present, and shows that it is easy to Him to raise the dead; the like He did in the case of Lazarus, “Our friend Lazarus sleepeth.” (John 11:11) This was also a lesson to them not to be afraid of death; forasmuch as He himself also should die, He made His disciples learn in the persons of others confidence and patient endurance of death. For when He was near, death was but as sleep. When He had said this, “They mocked him.” And He did not rebuke their mocking; that this mocking, and the pipes and all other things, might be a proof of her death. For ofttimes at His miracles when men would not believe, He convicted them by their own answers; as in the case of Lazarus, when He said, “Where have ye laid him?” so that they that answered, “Come and see,” and, “He stinketh, for he hath now been dead four days,” could no longer disbelieve that He had raised a dead man.  

Jerome They that had mocked the Reviver were not worthy to behold the mystery of the revival; and therefore it follows, “And when the multitude was put forth, he entered, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose.”  

Chrys. He restored her to life not by bringing in another soul, but by recalling that which had departed, and as it were raising it from sleep, and through this sight preparing the way for belief of the resurrection. And He not only restores her to life, but commands food to be given her, as the other Evangelists relate, that which was done might be seen to be no delusion. “And the fame of him went abroad into all that country.”  

Gloss., non occ. The fame, namely, of the greatness and novelty of the miracle, and its established truth; so that it could not be supposed to be a forgery.  

Hilary Mystically; The Lord enters the ruler’s house, that is, the synagogue, throughout which there resounded in the songs of the Law a strain of wailing.  

Jerome To this day the damsel lays dead in the ruler’s house; and they that seem to be teachers are but minstrels singing funeral dirges. The Jews also are not the crowd of believers, but of “people making a noise.” But when the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, then all Israel shall be saved.  

Hilary But that the number of the elect might be known to be but few out of the whole body of believers, the multitude is put forth; the Lord indeed would that they should be saved, but they mocked at His sayings and actions, and so were not worthy to be made partakers of His resurrection.  

Jerome He took her by the hand, and the maid arose; because if the hands of the Jews which are defiled with blood be not first cleansed, their synagogue which is dead shall not revive.  

Hilary “His fame went about into all that country;” that is, the salvation of the elect, the gift and works of Christ are preached.  

Rabanus Morally; The damsel dead in the house is the soul dead in thought. He says that she is asleep, because they that are now asleep in sin may yet be roused by penitence. The minstrels are flatterers who cherish the dead.  

Greg., Mor., xviii, 43 The multitude are put forth that the damsel may be raised; for unless the multitude of worldly cares is first banished from the secrets of the heart, the soul which is laid dead within, cannot rise again.  

Rabanus The maiden is raised in the house with few to witness, the young man without the gate, and Lazarus in the presence of many; for a public scandal requires a public expiation; a less notorious, a lesser remedy; and secret sins may be done away by penitence.
