# Lecture 7

32. As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil.  

> 33. And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake: and the multitudes marvelled, saying, “It was never so seen in Israel.”

> 34. But the Pharisees said, “He casteth out devils through the prince of the devils.”

> 35. And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.

> Remig. Observe the beautiful order of His miracles; how after He had given sight to the blind, He restored speech to the dumb, and healed the possessed of the daemon; by which He shows Himself the Lord of power, and the author of the heavenly medicine. For it was said by Isaiah, “Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped, and the tongue of the dumb loosed.” (Isa 35:6) Whence it is said, “When they were gone forth, they brought unto him a man dumb, and possessed with a daemon.”

Jerome The Greek word here is more frequent in common speech in the sense of, ‘deaf,’ but it is the manner of Scripture to use it indifferently as either.  

Chrys. This was not a mere natural defect; but was from the malignity of the daemon; and therefore he needed to be brought of others, for he could not ask any thing of others as living without voice, and the daemon chaining his spirit together with his tongue. Therefore Christ does not require faith of him, but immediately healed his disorder; as it follows, “And when the daemon was cast out, the dumb spake.”  

Hilary The natural order of things is here preserved; the daemon is first cast out, and there the functions of the members proceed. “And the multitude marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.”  

Chrys They set Him thus above others, because He not only healed, but with such ease, and quickness; and cured diseases both infinite in number, and in quality incurable. This most grieved the Pharisees, that they set Him before all others, not only those that then lived, but all who had lived before, on which account it follows, “But the Pharisees said, He casteth out daemons through the Prince of daemons.”  

Remig. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees denied such of the Lord’s miracles as they could deny; and such as they could not they explained by an evil interpretation, according to that, “In the multitude of they excellency thy enemies shall lie unto thee.” (Ps 66:3)  

Chrys. What can be more foolish than this speech of theirs? For it cannot be pretended that one daemon would cast out another; for they are wont to consent to one another’s deeds, and not to be at variance among themselves. But Christ not only cast out daemons, but healed the lepers, raised the dead, forgave sins, preached the kingdom of God, and brought men to the Father, which a daemon neither could nor would do.  

Rabanus Figuratively; As is the two blind men were denoted both nations, Jews and Gentiles, so in the man dumb and afflicted with the daemon is denoted the whole human race.  

Hilary Or; By the dumb and deaf, and daemoniac, is signified the Gentile world, needing health in every part; for sunk in evil of every kind, they are afflicted with disease of every part of the body.  

Remig. For the Gentiles were dumb; not being able to open their mouth in the confession of the true faith, and the praises of the Creator, or because in paying worship to dumb idols they were made like unto them. They were afflicted with a daemon, because by dying in unbelief they were made subject to the power of the Devil.  

Hilary But by the knowledge of God the frenzy of superstition being chased away, the sight, the hearing, and the word of salvation is brought in to them.  

Jerome As the blind receive light, so the tongue of the dumb is loosed, that he may confess Him whom before he denied. The wonder of the multitude is the confession of the nations. The scoff of the Pharisees is the unbelief of the Jews, which is to this day.  

Hilary The wonder of the multitude is followed up by the confession, “It was never so seen in Israel;” because he, for whom there was no help under the Law, is saved by the power of the Word.  

Remig. They who brought the dumb to be healed by the Lord, signify the Apostles and preachers, who brought the Gentile people to be saved before the face of divine mercy.  

Aug., De Cons. Evan. ii, 29 This account of the two blind men and the dumb daemon is read in Matthew only. The two blind men of whom the others speak are not the same as these, though something similar was done with them. So that even if Matthew had not also recorded their cure, we might have seen that this present narrative was of a different transaction. And this we ought diligently to remember, that many actions of our Lord are very much like one another, but are proved not to be the same action, by being both related at different times by the same Evangelist. So that when we find cases in which one is recorded by one Evangelist, and another by another, and some difference which we cannot reconcile between their accounts, we should suppose that they are like, but not the same, events.
