# Lecture 6

19. “But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.  

> 20. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you.”

> Chrys. To the foregoing topics of consolation, He adds another not a little one; that they should not say, How shall we be able to persuade such men as these, when they shall persecute us? He bids them be of good courage respecting their answer, saying, “When they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak.”

Remig. “How or what,” one refers to the substance, the other to the expression in words. And because both of these would be supplied by Him, there was no need for the holy preachers to be anxious about either.  

Jerome When then we are brought before judges for Christ’s sake, we ought to offer only our will for Christ. But Christ who dwelleth in us speaks for Himself, and the grace of the Holy Spirit will minister in our answer.  

Hilary For our faith, observing all the precepts of the Divine will, will be instructed with an answer according to knowledge, after the example of Abraham, to whom when he had given up Isaac, there was not wanting a ram for a victim. “For it is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you.”  

Remig., ap. Raban. Meaning, Ye indeed go out to the battle, but it is I who fight; you utter the words, but it is I who speak. Hence Paul speaks, “Seek ye a proof of Christ who speaketh in me?” (2 Cor 13:3)  

Chrys. Thus He raises them to the dignity of the Prophets, who have spoken by the Spirit of God. He who says here, “Take no thought what ye shall speak,” (1 Pet 3:15) has said in another place, “Be ye always ready to give an answer to him that demandeth a reason of the hope that is in you.” When it is a dispute among friends, we are commanded to “be ready;” but before the awful judgment, and the raging people, aid is ministered by Christ, that they may speak boldly and not be dismayed.
