# Lecture 2

5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, “Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not:  

> 6. But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

> 7. And as ye go, preach, saying, ‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’

> 8. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.”

> Gloss., non occ. Because the manifestation of the Spirit, as the Apostle speaks, is given for the profit of the Church, after bestowing His power on the Apostles, He sends them that they may exercise this power for the good of others; “These twelve Jesus sent forth.”

Chrys. Observe the propriety of the time in which they are sent. After they had seen the dead raised, the sea rebuked, and other like wonders, and had both in word and deed sufficient proof of His excellent power, then He sends them.  

Gloss., non occ. When He sends them, He teaches them whither they should go, what they should preach, and what they should do. And first, whither they should go; “Giving them commandment, and saying, Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”  

Jerome This passage does not contradict the command which He gave afterwards, “Go and teach all nations;” for this was before His resurrection, that was after. And it behoved the coming of Christ to be preached to the Jews first, that they might not have any just plea, or say that they were rejected of the Lord, who sent the Apostles to the Gentiles and Samaritans.  

Chrys. Also they were sent to the Jews first, in order that being trained in Judaea, as in a palaestra, they might enter on the arena of the world to contend; thus He taught them like weak nestlings to fly.  

Greg., Hom. in Ev., iv. 1 Or He would be first preached to Judaea and afterwards to the Gentiles, in order that the preaching of the Redeemer should seem to seek out foreign lands only because it had been rejected in His own. There were also at that time some among the Jews who should be called, and among the Gentiles some who were not to be called, as being unworthy of being renewed to life, and yet not deserving of the aggravated punishment which would ensue upon their rejection of the Apostles’ preaching.  

Hilary The promulgation of the Law deserved also the first preaching of the Gospel; and Israel was to have less excuse for its crime, as it had experienced more care in being warned.  

Chrys. Also that they should not suppose that they were hated of Christ because they had reviled Him, and branded Him as daemoniac, He sought first their cure, and withholding His disciples from all other nations, He sent this people physicians and teachers; and not only forbid them to preach to any others before the Jews, but would not that they should so much as approach the way that led to the Gentiles; “Go not into the way of the Gentiles.” And because the Samaritans, though more readily disposed to be converted to the faith, were yet at enmity with the Jews, He would not suffer the Samaritans to be preached to before the Jews.  

Gloss., ap. Anselm The Samaritans were Gentiles who had been settled in the land of Israel by the king of Assyria after the captivity which he made. They had been driven by many terrors to turn to Judaism, and had received circumcision and the five books of Moses, but renouncing everything else; hence there was no communication between the Jews and the Samaritans.  

Chrys. From these then He diverts his disciples, and sends them to the children of Israel, whom He calls “perishing” sheep, not straying; in every way contriving an apology for them, and drawing them to Himself.  

Hilary Though they are here called sheep, yet they raged against Christ with the tongues and throats of wolves and vipers.  

Jerome Figuratively, herein we who bear the name of Christ are commanded not to walk in the way of the Gentiles, or the error of the heretics, but as we are separate in religion, that we be also separate in our life.  

Gloss., non occ. Having told them to whom they should go, He now introduces what they should preach; “Go and preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.”  

Rabanus The kingdom of heaven is here said to draw nigh by the faith in the unseen Creator which is bestowed upon us, not by any movement of the visible elements. The saints are rightly denoted by the heavens, because they contain God by faith, and love Him with affection.  

Chrys. Behold the greatness of their ministry, behold the dignity of the Apostles. They are not to preach of any thing that can be an object of sense, as Moses and the Prophets did; but things new and unlooked for; those preached earthly goods, but these the kingdom of heaven and all the goods that are there.  

Greg. Miracles also were granted to the holy preachers, that the power they should show might be a pledge of the truth of their words, and they who preached new things should also do new things; wherefore it follows, “Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out daemons.”  

Jerome Lest peasants untaught and illiterate, without the graces of speech, should obtain credit with none when they announced the kingdom of heaven, He gives them power to do the things above mentioned, that the greatness of the miracles might approve the greatness of their promises.  

Hilary The exercise of the Lord’s power is wholly entrusted to the Apostles, that they who were formed in the image of Adam, and the likeness of God, should now obtain the perfect image of Christ; and whatever evil Satan had introduced into the body of Adam, this they should now repair by communion with the Lord’s power.  

Greg., Hom. in Ev., xxix, 4 These signs were necessary in the beginning of the Church; the faith of the believers must be fed with miracles, that it might grow.  

Chrys. But afterwards they ceased when a reverence for the faith was universally established. Or, if they were continued at all, they were few and seldom; for it is usual with God to do such things when evil is increased, then He shows forth His power.  

Greg. The Holy Church daily doth spiritually, what it then did materially by the Apostles; yea, things far greater, inasmuch as she raises and cures souls and not bodies.  

Remig. “The sick” are the slothful who have not strength to live well; “the lepers” are the unclean in sin and carnal delights; the daemoniacs are they that are given up under the power of the Devil.  

Jerome And because spiritual gifts are more lightly esteemed, when money is made the means of obtaining them, He adds a condemnation of avarice; “Freely ye have received, freely give;” I your Master and Lord have imparted these to you without price, do you therefore give them to others in like manner, that the free grace of the Gospel be not corrupted.  

Gloss., non occ. This He says, that Judas who had the bag might not use the above power for getting money; a plain condemnation of the abomination of the simoniacal heresy.  

Greg., Hom. in Ev., iv, 4 For He knew before that there would be some that would turn the gift of the Spirit which they had received into merchandize, and pervert the power of miracles into an instrument of their covetousness.  

Chrys. Observe how He is as careful that they should be upright in moral virtue, as that they should have the miraculous powers, showing that miracles without these are naught. “Freely ye have received,” seems a check upon their pride; “freely give,” a command to keep themselves pure from filthy lucre. Or, that what they should do might not be thought to be their own benevolence, He says, “Freely ye have received;” as much as to say; Ye bestow nothing of your own on these ye relieve; for ye have not received these things for money, nor for wages of labor; as ye have received them, so give to others; for indeed it is not possible to receive a price equal to their value.
