# Lecture 7

21. “And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child; and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death.  

> 22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.”

> Gloss, ap. Anselm Having placed the comfort first, He adds the more alarming perils; “Brother shall deliver up brother to death, and the father the son; children shall rise against parents, to put them to death.”

Greg., Hom. in Ev., xxxv, 3 Wrongs which we suffer from strangers, pain us less than those we suffer from men on whose affections we had counted; for besides the bodily affliction, there is then the pain of lost affection.  

Jerome This we see often happen in persecutions, nor is there any true affection between those whose faith is different.  

Chrys. What follows is yet more dreadful, “Ye shall be hated of all men;” they sought to exterminate them as common enemies of all the world. To this again is added the consolation, “For my name’s sake;” and yet further to cheer them, “Whosoever shall endure to the end, he shall be saved.” For many are hot and zealous in the beginning, but afterwards grow cool, for these, He says, I look at the end. For where is the profit of seeds that only sprout at first? wherefore He requires a sufficient endurance from them.  

Jerome For virtue is not to begin but to complete.  

Remig. And the reward is not for those that begin, but for those that bring to an end.  

Chrys. But that no man should say, that Christ wrought all things in His Apostles, and therefore it is nothing wonderful that they were made such as they were, since they did not bear the burden of these things, therefore He says, that perseverance was their work. For though they were rescued from their first perils, they are preserved for still harder trials, which again shall be followed by others, and they shall be in danger of snares as long as they live. This He covertly intimates when he says, “Whosoever shall endure to the end, he shall be saved.”  

Remig. That is, He who shall not let go the commands of the faith, nor fall away in persecution, shall be saved; he shall receive the reward of the heavenly kingdom for his earthly persecutions. And note that ‘the end’ does not always mean destruction, but sometimes perfection, as in that, “Christ is the end of the Law.” (Rom 10:4) So the sense here may be, “Whosoever shall endure to the end,” that is, in Christ.  

Aug., City of God, book 21, ch. 25 To endure in Christ, is to abide in His faith which worketh by love.
