# Lecture 4

11. “And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence.  

> 12. And when ye come into an house, salute it.

> 13. And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.

> 14. And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.

> 15. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, then for that city.”

> Chrys. The Lord had said above, “The workman is worthy of his meat;” that they should not hence suppose that He would open all doors to them, He here commands them to use much circumspection in the choice of a host, saying, “Into what city or town ye enter, enquire who in it is worthy.”

Jerome The Apostles, on entering a strange town, could not know of each inhabitant what sort of man he was; they were to choose their host therefore by the report of the people, and opinion of the neighbours, that the worthiness of the preacher might not be disgraced by the ill character of his entertainer.  

Chrys. How then did Christ Himself abide with the publican? Because he was made worthy by his conversion; for this command that he should be worthy, had respect not to their rank, but to their furnishing food. For if he be worthy he will provide them with food, especially when they need no more than bare necessaries. Observe how though He stripped them of all property, He supplied all their wants, suffering them to abide in the houses of those whom they taught. For so they were both themselves set free from care, and convinced men that it was for their salvation only that they had come, seeing they carried nothing about with them, and desired nothing beyond necessaries. And they did not lodge at all places indiscriminately, for He would not have them known only by their miracles, but much more by their virtues. But nothing is a greater mark of virtue, than to discard superfluities.  

Jerome One host is chosen who does not so much confer a favour upon him who is to abide with him, as receive one. For it is said, “Who in it is worthy,” that he may know that he rather receives than does a favour.  

Chrys. Also observe that He has not yet endowed them with all gifts; for He has not given them power to discern who is worthy, but bids them seek out; and not only to find out who is worthy, but also not to pass from house to house, saying, “And there remain until ye depart out of that city;” so they would neither make their entertainer sorrowful, nor themselves incur suspicion of lightness or gluttony.  

Ambrose, Ambros., in Luc., 9. 5 The Apostles are not to choose carelessly the house into which they enter, that they may have no cause for changing their lodging; the same caution is not enforced upon the entertainer, lest in choosing his guests, his hospitality should be diminished. “When ye enter a house, salute it, saying, Peace be to this house.”  

Gloss., interlin. As much as to say, Pray ye for peace upon the master of the house, that all resistance to the truth may be pacified.  

Jerome Here is a latent allusion to the form of salutation in Hebrew and Syriac; they say Salemalach, or Salamalach, for the Greek, , or Latin, Ave; that is, ‘Peace be with you.’ The command then is, that on entering any house they should pray for peace for their host; and, as far as they may be able, to still all discords, so that if any quarrel should arise, they, who had prayed for peace should have it—others should have the discord; as it follows, “And if that house be worthy, your peace shall rest upon it; but if it be not worthy, your peace shall return to you again.”  

Remig., ap. Raban. Thus either the hearer, being predestined to eternal life, will follow the heavenly word when he hears it; or if there be none who will hear it, the preacher himself shall not be without fruit; for his peace returns to him when he receives of the Lord recompense for all his labor.  

Chrys. The Lord instructs them, that though they were teachers, yet they should not look to be first saluted by others; but that they should honor others by first saluting them. And then He shows them that they should give not a salutation only, but a benediction, when He says, “If that house be worthy, your peace shall rest upon it.”  

Remig. The Lord therefore taught his disciples to offer peace on their entering into a house, that by means of their salutation their choice might be directed to a worthy house and host. As though He had said, Offer peace to all, they will show themselves either worthy by accepting, or unworthy by not accepting it; for though you have chosen a hose that is worthy by the character he bears among his neighbours, yet ought you to salute him, that the preacher may seem rather to enter by invitation, than to intrude himself. This salutation of peace in few words may indeed by referred to the trial of the worthiness of the house or master.  

Hilary The Apostles salute the house with the prayer of peace; yet so as that peace seems rather spoken than given. For their own peace which was the bowels of their pity ought not to rest upon the house if it were not worthy; then the sacrament of heavenly peace could be kept within the Apostles own bosom. Upon such as rejected the precepts of the heavenly kingdom an eternal curse is left by the departure of the Apostles, and the dust shaken from their feet; “And whosoever shall not receive you, not hear your words, “when ye go out of that house, or that town, cast the dust off your feet.” For he that lives in any place seems to have a kind of fellowship with that place. By the casting the dust off the feet, therefore all that belonged to that house is left behind, and nothing of healing or soundness is borrowed from the footsteps of the Apostles having trod their soil.  

Jerome Also they shake off the dust as a testimony of the Apostles’ toil, that in preaching the Gospel they had come even so far, or as a token that from those that rejected the Gospel they would accept nothing, not even the necessaries of life.  

Rabanus Otherwise; The feet of the disciples signify the labor and progress of preaching. The dust which covers them is the lightness of earthly thoughts, from which even the greatest doctors cannot be free; their anxiety for their hearers involves them in cares for their prosperity, and in passing through the ways of this world, they gather the dust of the earth they tread upon. They then who have despised the teaching of these doctors, turn upon themselves all the toils and dangers and anxieties of the Apostles as a witness to their damnation. And lest it should seem a slight thing not to receive the Apostles, He adds, “verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.”  

Jerome Because to the men of Sodom and Gomorrah no man had ever preached; but this city had been preached to and had rejected the Gospel.  

Remig., ap. Raban. Or because the men of Sodom and Gomorrah were hospitable among their sensuality, but they had never entertained such strangers as the Apostles.  

Jerome But if it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom than for that city, hence we may learn that there is difference of degree in the punishment of sinners.  

Remig. Sodom and Gomorrah are especially mentioned, to show that those sins which are against nature are particularly hateful to God, for which the world was drowned with the waters of the deluge, four towns were overthrown, and the world is daily afflicted with manifold evils.  

Hilary Figuratively, The Lord teaches us not to enter the houses or to mix in the acquaintance of those who persecute Christ, or who are ignorant of Him; and in each town to enquire who among them is worthy, i.e., where there is a Church wherein Christ dwells; and not to pass to another, because this house is worthy, this host is our right host. But there would be many of the Jews who would be so well disposed to the Law, that though they believed in Christ because they admired His works, yet they would abide in the works of the Law; and others again who, desiring to make trial of that liberty which is in Christ, would feign themselves ready to forsake the Law for the Gospel; many also would be drawn aside into heresy by perverse understanding. And since all these would falsely maintain that with them only was Catholic verity, therefore we must with great caution seek out the house, i.e., the Church.
