# Lecture 9

***24. “The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord.***

> 25. It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?”

> Chrys. Because it should come to pass that His disciples among their other persecutions should suffer loss of character, which to many is the most grievous of all calamities, He consoles them from His own example, and those things that were spoken of Him; a comfort to which no other can be compared.

Hilary For the Lord, the Light eternal, the Captain of the faithful, the Parent of immortality, set before His disciples this solace of the sufferings that should come upon them, that we should embrace it as our glory when we are made like to our Lord in suffering; whence He says, “The disciple is not above his master, nor the slave above his lord.”  

Chrys. Understand, so long as he is a disciple or servant, he is not above his master or lord by the nature of honor. And do not here object to me such cases as rarely happen, but receive this according to the common course of things.  

Remig. He calls Himself master and lord; by disciple and servant He denotes His Apostles.  

Gloss. ord. As much as to say, Be not indignant that ye suffer things, which I also suffer, because I am your lord, who do what I will, and your master, who teach you what I know to be profitable for you.  

Remig. And because this sentence seemed not to agree with the foregoing words, He shows what they mean by adding, “If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more they of his household?”  

Chrys. He said not here, ‘slaves,’ but “those of his household,” to show how dear they were to Him; as elsewhere He said, “I will not call you slaves, but my friends.” (John 15:15)  

Remig. As much as to say, Ye therefore will not seek worldly honours and human glory, while you see me pursuing the redemption of mankind through mocking and contumely.  

Chrys. And He says not only, If they have reviled the master of the house, but expresses the very words of railing, for they had called Him Beelzebub.  

Jerome Beelzebub is the idol of Accaron who is called in the book of Kings, the God of flies; (2 Ki 1:3) ‘Bel,’ signifying, “idol;” ‘zebub,’ a “fly.” The Prince of the daemons He calls by the name of the foulest of idols, which is so called because of the uncleanness of the fly, which destroys the sweetness of ointment.
