# Lecture 15

40. “He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.  

> 41. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man’s reward.

> 42. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.”

> Jerome The Lord when He sends forth His disciples to preach, teaches them that dangers are not to be feared, that natural affection is to be postponed to religion—gold He had above taken from them, brass He had shaken out of their purses—hard then surely the condition of the preachers! Whence their living? Whence their food and necessaries? Therefore He tempers the rigour of His precepts by the following promises, that in entertaining the Apostles each believer may consider that he entertains the Lord.

Chrys. Enough had been said above to persuade those who should have to entertain the Apostles. For who would not with all willingness take in to his house men who were so courageous, that they despised all dangers that others might be saved? Above He had threatened punishment to those who should not receive them, He now promises reward to such as should receive them. And first He holds out to those who should entertain them the honor, that in so doing they were entertaining Christ, and even the Father; “He who receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me.” What honor to be compared to this of receiving the Father and the Son?  

Hilary These words show that He has a Mediator’s office, and since He came from God, when He is received by us, through Him God is transfused into us; and by this disposition of grace to have received the Apostles is no other than to have received God; for Christ dwells in them, and God in Christ.  

Chrys. A further reward also He promises, saying, “He who receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet’s reward.” He said not merely, “Whoso receiveth a prophet,” or “a righteous man,” but “in the name of a prophet,” and “in the name of a righteous man;” that is, not for any greatness in this life, or other temporal account, but because he is a prophet, or a righteous man.  

Jerome Otherwise; To this His exhortation to the disciple to entertain his teacher, there might a secret objection arise among the faithful; then shall we have to support the false prophets, or Judas, the traitor. To this end it is that the Lord instructs them in these words, that it is not the person but the office that they should look to: and that the entertainer loses not his reward, though he whom he entertains be unworthy.  

Chrys. “A prophet’s reward, and a righteous man’s reward,” are such rewards as it is fitting he should have who entertains a prophet, or a righteous man; or, such a reward as a prophet or righteous man should have.  

Greg., Hom. in Ev., xx, 12 He says not, a reward from a prophet, or righteous man, but the reward of a prophet or righteous man. For the prophet is perhaps a righteous man, and the less he possesses in this world, the greater confidence has he in speaking in behalf of righteousness. He who hath of this world’s goods, in supporting such a man, makes himself a free partaker in his righteousness, and shall receive the reward of righteousness together with him whom he has aided by supporting him. He is full of the spirit of prophecy, but he lacks bodily sustenance, and if the body be not supported, it is certain that the voice will fail. Whoso then gives a prophet food, gives him strength for speaking, therefore together with the prophet he shall receive the prophet’s reward, when he shows before the face of God what bounty be showed him.  

Jerome Mystically; He who receives a prophet as a prophet, and understands him speaking of things to come, he shall receive reward of that prophet. The Jews therefore, who understand the prophets carnally, do not receive the prophet’s reward.  

Remig. Some understand by the prophet here, the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom Moses says, “A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you;” (Deut 18:18) and the same also by the righteous man, because he is beyond comparison righteous. He then who shall receive a prophet or righteous man in the name of the prophet or righteous man, i.e., of Christ, shall receive reward from Him for love of whom he received Him.  

Jerome That none should say, I am poor and therefore cannot be hospitable, He takes away even this plea by the instance of a cup of cold water, given with good will. He says “cold water,” because in “hot,” poverty and lack of fuel might be pleaded. And whosoever shall give to drink to one of the least of these a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward.  

Remig. “The least of these,” that is, not a prophet, or a righteous man, but one of these least.  

Gloss, non occ. Note, that God looks more to the pious mind of the giver, than to the abundance of the thing given.  

Gloss. ord. Or, “the least,” are they who have nothing at all in this world, and shall be judges with Christ.  

Hilary Or; Seeing beforehand that there would be many who would only glory in the name of Apostleship, but in their whole life and walk would be unworthy of it, He does not therefore deprive of its reward that service which might be rendered to them in belief of their religious life. For though they were the very least, that is, the greatest of sinners, yet even small offices of mercy shown them, such as are denoted by the cup of cold water, should not be shown in vain. For the honor is not done to a man that is a sinner, but to his title of disciple.
