# Lecture 3

7. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, “What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?  

> 8. But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft clothing are in kings’ houses.

> 9. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet.

> 10. For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.”

> Chrys., Hom xxxvii Sufficient had been now done for John’s disciples; they returned certified concerning Christ by the wonderful works which they had seen. But it behoved that the multitude also should be corrected, which had conceived many things amiss from the question of John’s disciples, not knowing the purpose of John in sending them. They might say, He who bare such witness to Christ, is now of another mind, and doubts whether this be He. Doth he this because he hath jealousy against Jesus! Has the prison taken away his courage? Or spake he before but empty and untrue words?

Hilary Therefore that this might not lead them to think of John as though he were offended concerning Christ, it continues, “When they had gone away, Jesus began to speak to the multitudes concerning John.”  

Chrys. “As they departed,” that He should not seem to speak flattery of the man; and in correcting the error of the multitude, He does not openly expose their secret suspicions, but by framing his words against what was in their hearts, He shows that He knows hidden things. But He said not as to the Jews, “Why think ye evil in your hearts? though indeed it was evil that they had thought; yet it proceeded not from wickedness, but from ignorance; there- fore He spake not to them harshly, but answered for John, showing that he had not fallen from his former opinion. This He teaches them, not by His word only, but by their own witness, the witness of their own actions, as well as their own words. “What went ye out into the wilderness to see?” As much as to say, Why did ye leave the towns and go out into the wilderness? So great multitudes would not have gone with such haste into the desert, if they had not thought that they should see one great, and wonderful, one more stable than the rock.  

Pseudo-Chrys. They had not gone out at this time into the desert to see John, for he was not now in the deaert, but in prison; but He speaks of the past time while John was yet in the desert, and the people flocked to him.  

Chrys. And note that making no mention of any other fault, He clears John of fickleness, which the multitude had suspected him of, saying, “A reed shaken by the wind?”  

Greg., Hom in Ev. vi. 2 This He proposes, not to assert, but to deny. For if but a breath of air touch a reed, it bends it one way or other; a type of the carnal mind, which leans to either side, according as the breath of praise or detraction reaches it. A reed shaken by the wind John was not, for no variety of circumstance bent him from his uprightness. The Lord’s meaning then is,  

Jerome Was it for this ye went out into the desert to see a man like unto a reed, and carried about by every wind, so that in lightness of mind he doubts concerning Him whom once he preached? Or it may be he is roused against Me by the sting of envy, and he seeks empty honor by his preaching, that he may thereof make gain. Why should he covet wealth? that he may have dainty fare? But his food is locusts and wild honey. That he may wear soft raiment? But his clothing is camel’s hair. This is that He adds, “But what went ye out for to see a man clothed in soft raiment?  

Chrys. Otherwise; That John is not as a waving reed, yourselves have shown by going out unto the desert to him. Nor can any say that John was once firm, but has since become wilfull and wavering; for as some are prone to anger by natural disposition, others become so by long weakness and indu1gence, so in inconstancy, some are by nature inconstant, some become so by yielding to their own humour and self-indulgence. But John was neither inconstant by natural disposition; this he means by saying, “What went ye out for to see, a reed shaken by the wind?” Neither had he corrupted an excellent nature by self-indulgence, for that he had not served the flesh is shown by his raiment, his abode in the desert, his prison. Had he sought soft raiment, he would not have dwelt in the desert, but in kings’ houses; “Lo they that are clothed in soft raiment, are in kings’ houses.”  

Jerome This teaches that an austere life and strict preaching ought to shun kings’ courts and the palaces of the rich and luxurious.  

Greg., Hom in Ev., vi., 3 Let no one suppose that there is nothing sinful in luxury and rich dress; if pursuit of such things had been blameless, the Lord would not have thus commended John for the coarseness of his raiment, nor would Peter have checked the desire of fine clothes in women as he does, “Not in costly raiment.” (1 Pet 3:3)  

Aug., Doctr. Christ., iii, 12 In all such things we blame not the use of the things, but the lust of those that use them. For whoever uses the good things in his reach more sparingly than are the habits of those with whom he lives, is either temperate or superstitious. Whoever again uses them in a measure exceeding the practice of the good among whom he lives, either has some *(margin note: aliquid)* meaning therein, or else is dissolute.  

Chrys. Having described his habits of life from his dwelling-place, his dress, and the concourse of men to hear him, He now brings in that he is also a prophet, “But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet.”  

Greg, Hom. in Ev., vi. 5 The office of a prophet is to foretel things to come, not to show them present. John therefore is more than a prophet, because Him whom he had foretold by going before Him, the same he showed as present by pointing Him out.  

Jerome In this he is also greater than the other prophets, that to his prophetic privilege is added the reward of the Baptist that he should baptize his Lord.  

Chrys. Then he shows in what respect He is greater, saying, “This is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my angel before thy face.”  

Jerome To add to this great worthiness of John, He brings a passage from Malachias, in which he is spoken of as an Angel. (ref Mal 3:1) We must suppose that John is here called an Angel, not as partaking the Angelic nature, but from the dignity of his office as a forerunner of the Lord.  

Greg. For the Greek word Angel, is in Latin Nuntius, ‘a messenger.’ He therefore who came to bear a heavenly message is rightly called an Angel, that he may preserve in his title the dignity which he performs in his office.  

Chrys. He shows wherein it is that John is greater than the Prophets, namely, in that he is nigh unto Christ, as he says, “I send before thy face,” that is, near Thee, as those that walk next to the king’s chariot are more illustrious than others, so likewise is John because of his nearness to Christ.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Also the other Prophets were sent to announce Christ’s coming, but John to prepare His way, as it follows, “who shall make ready thy way before thee;”  

Gloss, interlin. That is, shall open the hearts of Thy hearers by preaching repentance and baptizing.  

Jerome Mystically; The desert is that which is deserted of the Holy Spirit, where there is no habitation of God; in the reed is signified a man who in outward show lives a pious life, but lacks all real fruit within himself, fair outside, within hollow, moved with every breath of wind, that is, with every impulse of unclean spirits, having no firmness to remain still, devoid of the marrow of the soul; by the garment wherewith his body is clothed is his mind shown, that it is lost in luxury and self-indulgence. The kings are the fallen angels; they are they who are powerful in this life, and the lords of this world. Thus, “They that are clothed in soft raiment are in kings’ houses;” that is, those whose bodies are enervated and destroyed by luxury, it is clear are possessed by demons.  

Greg. Also John was not “clothed in soft raiment,” that is, he did not encourage sinners in their sinful life by speaking smooth things, but rebuked them with sharpness and rigour, saying, “Generation of vipers, &c.” (Matt 3:7)
