# Lecture 2

10. And the disciples came, and said unto him, “Why speakest thou unto them in parables?”  

> 11. He answered and said unto them, “Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.

> 12. For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.

> 13. Therefore speak I to them in parables because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.

> 14. And in them is fulfilled thy prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:

> 15. For this people’s heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed: lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.

> 16. But blessed are your eyes, for they see and your ears, for they hear.

> 17. For verily I say unto you, That many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.”

> Gloss., ap. Anselm The disciples understanding that the things which were spoken by the Lord to the people were obscure, desired to hint to Him that He should not speak in parables to them. “And his disciples came to him, and said, Why speakest thou to them in parables?”

Chrys., Hom. xiv Wherein it is worthy admiration, that the disciples who desire to learn of Him, know when they ought to ask Him, for they do not this before the multitude. This Matthew declares, when he says, “And they came to him;” and Mark more expressly says, that “they came to him when he was alone.” (Mark 4:10)  

Jerome We must enquire how they could come to Him at that time when Jesus was sitting in the ship; we may understand that they had at the first entered into the ship, and standing there, made this enquiry of Him.  

Remig. The Evangelist therefore says, came to him, to express that they eagerly enquired of Him; or they might indeed approach Him bodily, though the space between them was small.  

Chrys. And observe moreover their goodness, how great their thought for others, that they enquire about what concerns others, before what relates to themselves. For they say not, ‘Why speakest thou to us in parables?’ but “to them. And he answered and said unto them, Because it is given to you to know the mystery of the kingdom of heaven.”  

Remig. To you, I say, who adhere to Me, and believe in Me. By the mystery of the kingdom of heaven, He intends the Gospel doctrine. “To them,” that is, to them that are without, and who would not believe on Him, the Scribes namely and Pharisees, and to the rest who continue in unbelief, it is not given. Let us then, with the disciples, come unto the Lord with a pure heart, that He may think us worthy to interpret to us the evangelic teaching; according to that, “They who draw near to his feet, shall receive of his doctrine.” (Deut 33:3)  

Chrys. In saying this, He does not imply any necessity or fate, but shows at once, that they, to whom it is not given, are the cause of all their own miseries, and yet that the knowledge of the Divine mysteries is the gift of God, and a grace given from above. Yet this does not destroy free will, as is manifest from what follows; for to prevent that either these should despair, or those be remiss, when they hear that “to you it is given,” He shows that the beginning of all lays with ourselves, and then He adds, “For whoso hath, to him shall be given, and he shall abound; and whoso hath not, from him shall be taken what he hath.” As much as to say, Whoso has the desire and the zeal, to him shall be given all those things which are of God; but whoso lacketh these, and does not contribute that part that pertains to him, to him neither are the things which are of God given, but even those things that he hath are taken from him; not because God takes them away, but because he hath made himself unworthy of those that he has. Wherefore we also, if we see any hearkening carelessly, and having exhorted him to attend, he do not heed us, let us be silent; for should we persevere in urging him, his slothfulness will be the more charged against him. But him that is zealous to learn, we draw onwards, pouring forth many things. And He well said according to another Evangelist, “That which he seemeth to have;” (Luke 8:18) for, in truth, he has not even that he has.  

Remig. He that has a desire to read, shall have given to him power to understand, and whoso has not desire to read, that understanding which by the bounty of nature he seems to have, even that shall be taken from him. Or, whoso has charity, to him shall be given the other virtues also; and from him who has not charity, the other virtues likewise shall be taken away, for without charity there can be nothing good.  

Jerome Or, To the Apostles who believe in Christ there is given, but from the Jews who believed not on the Son of God there is taken away, even whatever good they might seem to have by nature. For they cannot understand any thing with wisdom, seeing they have not the head of wisdom.  

Hilary For the Jews not having faith, have lost also the Law which they had; and Gospel faith has the perfect gift, inasmuch as if received it enriches with new fruit, if rejected it subtracts from the riches of ancient possession.  

Chrys. But that what He had said might be made more manifest He adds, “Therefore speak I unto them in parables, because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.” Had this been a natural blindness, He ought to have opened their eyes; but forasmuch as it is voluntary, therefore He said not simply, ‘They see not,’ but, “Seeing they see not.” For they had seen the daemons going out, and they said, “He casts out daemons by Beelzebub;” they heard that He drew all men to God and they say, “This man is not of God.” (John 9:16) Therefore because they spake the very contrary to what they saw and heard, to see and to hear is taken from them; for they profit nothing, but rather fall under judgment. For this reason He spake to them at first not in parables, but with much clearness; but because they perverted all they saw and heard, He now speaks in parables.  

Remig. And it should be noted, that not only what He spake, but also what He did, were parables, that is, signs of things spiritual, which He clearly shows when He says, “That seeing they may not see;” but words are heard and not seen.  

Jerome This He says of those who were standing on the shore, and separated from Jesus, and who because of the dashing of the waves, heard not distinctly what was said.  

Chrys. And that they should not say, He slanders us as an enemy, He brings forward the Prophet declaring the same opinion, as it follows, “That there might be fulfilled in them the prophecy of Isaiah, who said, With the hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see and shall not behold.” (Isa 6:9)  

Gloss., non occ. That is; With the hearing ye shall hear words, but shall not understand the hidden meaning of those words; seeing ye shall see My flesh indeed, but shall not discern the divinity.  

Chrys. This He said because they had taken away their own sight and hearing, shutting their eyes, and hardening their hearts. For not only did they not hear at all, but they heard obtusely, as it follows, “The heart of this people is waxed gross, and they have heard hardly with their ears.”  

Raban. The heart of the Jews is made gross with the grossness of wickedness, and through the abundance of their sins they hear hardly the Lord’s words, because they have received them ungratefully.  

Jerome And that we should not suppose that this grossness of the heart and heaviness of the ears is of nature, and not of choice, He adds the fruit of their own wilfulness, “For they have shut their eyes.”  

Chrys. Herein He points out how extreme their wickedness, how determined their aversion. Again to draw them towards Him, He adds, “And be converted, and 1 should heal them;” which shows that if they would be converted, they should be healed. As if one should say, If he would ask me I would immediately forgive him, this would point out how he might be reconciled; so here when He says, “Lest they should be converted and I should heal them,” He shows that it was possible they should be converted, and having done penitence should be saved.  

Aug., Quaest. in Matt., q. 14 Otherwise; “They have shut their eyes lest they should see with their eyes,” that is, themselves were the cause that God shut their eyes. For another Evangelist says, “He hath blinded their eyes.” But is this to the end that they should never see? Or that they should not see so much as this, that becoming discontent with their own blindness and bewailing themselves, should so be humbled, and moved to confession of their sins and pious seeking after God. For Mark thus expresses the same thing, “Lest they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them.” From which we learn, that by their sins they deserved not to understand; and that yet this was allowed them in mercy that they should confess their sins, and should turn, and so merit to be forgiven. But when John relating this expresses it thus, “Therefore they could not believe because Esaias said again, He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they should not see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them,” (John 12:39) this seems to be opposed to this interpretation, and to compel us to take what is here said, “Lest they should see with their eyes,” not as though they might come to see after this fashion, but that they should never see at all; for he says it plainly, “That they should not see with their eyes.” And that he says, “Therefore they could not believe,” sufficiently shows that the blindness was not indicted, to the end that moved thereby, and grieving that they understood not, they should be converted through penitence; for that they could not, unless they had first believed, and by believing had been converted, and by conversion had been healed, and having been healed understood; but it rather shows that they were therefore blinded that they should not believe. For he speaks most clearly, “Therefore they could not believe.” But if it be so, who would not rise up in defense of the Jews, and pronounce them to be free from all blame for their unbelief? For, “Therefore they could not believe, because he hath blinded their eyes.” But because we must rather believe God to be without fault, we are driven to confess that by some other sins they had thus deserved to be blinded, and that indeed this blinding prevented them from believing; for the words of John are these, “They could not believe, because that Elias said again, He hath blinded their eyes.” It is in vain then to endeavour to understand it that they were therefore blinded that they should be converted; seeing they could not be converted because they believed not; and they could not believe because they were blinded. Or perhaps we should not say amiss thus—that some of the Jews were capable of being healed, but that being puffed up with so great swelling pride, it was good for them at first that they should not believe, that they might understand the Lord speaking in parables, which if they did not understand they would not believe; and thus not believing on Him, they together with the rest who were past hope crucified Him; and at length after His resurrection, they were converted, when humbled by the guilt of His death they loved Him the more because of the heavy guilt which had been forgiven them; for their so great pride needed such an humiliation to overcome it. This might indeed be thought an inconsistent explanation, did we not plainly read in the Acts of the Apostles *(margin note: Acts 2:37)* that thus it was. This then that John says, “Therefore they could not believe, because he hath blinded their eyes that they should not see,” is not repugnant to our holding that they were therefore blinded that they should be converted; that is to say, that the Lord’s meaning was therefore purposely clothed in the obscurities of parables, that after His resurrection they might turn them to wisdom with a more healthy penitence. For by reason of the darkness of His discourse, they being blinded did not understand the Lord’s sayings, and not understanding them, they did not believe on Him, and not believing on Him they crucified Him; thus after His resurrection, terrified by the miracles that were wrought in His name, they had the greater compunction for their great sin, and were more prostrated in penitence; and accordingly after indulgence granted they turned to obedience with a more ardent affection. Notwithstanding, some there were to whom this blinding profited not to conversion.  

Remig. In all the clauses the word ‘not’ must be understood; thus; That they should not see with their eyes, and should not hear with their ears, and should not understand with their heart, and should not be converted, and I should heal them.  

Gloss., ap. Anselm So then the eyes of them that see, and will not believe, are miserable, but your eyes are blessed; whence it follows, “Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear.”  

Jerome If we had not read above that invitation to his hearers to understand, when the Savior said, “He that hath ears to hear let him hear,” we might here suppose that the eyes and ears which are now blessed are those of the body. But I think that those eyes are blessed which can discern Christ’s sacraments, and those ears of which Isaiah speaks, “The Lord hath given me an ear.” (Isa 50:4)  

Gloss. ord. The mind is called an eye, because it is intently directed upon what is set before it to understand it; and an ear, because it learns from the teaching of another.  

Hilary Or, He is speaking of the blessedness of the Apostolic times, to whose eyes and ears it was permitted to see and to hear the salvation of God, many Prophets and just men having desired to see and to hear that which was destined to be in the fullness of times; whence it follows; “Verily I say unto you, that many Prophets and just men have desired to see the things that ye see, and to hear the things that ye hear, and have not heard them.”  

Jerome This place seems to be contradicted by what is said elsewhere. “Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad.” (John 8:56)  

Raban. Also Isaiah and Micah, and many other Prophets, saw the glory of the Lord; and were thence called ‘seers.’  

Jerome But He said not, ‘The Prophets and the just men,’ but “many;” for out of the whole number, it may be that some saw, and others saw not. But as this is a perilous interpretation, that we should seem to be making a distinction between the merits of the saints, at least as far as the degree of their faith in Christ, therefore we may suppose that Abraham saw in enigma, and not in substance. But ye have truly present with you, and hold, your Lord, enquiring of Him at your will, and eating with Him. *(margin note: convescimini)*  

Chrys. These things then which the Apostles saw and heard, are such as His presence, His voice, His teaching. And in this He sets them before not the evil only, but even before the good, pronouncing them more blessed than even the righteous men of old. For they saw not only what the Jews saw not, but also what the righteous men and Prophets desired to see, and had not seen. For they had beheld these things only by faith, but these by sight, and even yet more clearly. You see how He identifies the Old Testament with the New, for had the Prophets been the servants of any strange or hostile Deity, they would not have desired to see Christ.
