# Lecture 6

23. Then said Jesus unto his disciples, “Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.  

> 24. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.”

> 25. When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, “Who then can be saved?”

> 26. But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, “With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.”

> Gloss., ap. Anselm The Lord took occasion from this rich man to hold discourse concerning the covetous; “Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, &c.”

Chrys. What He spoke was not condemning riches in themselves, but those who were enslaved by them; also encouraging His disciples that being poor they should not be ashamed by reason of their poverty.  

Hilary To have riches is no sin; but moderation is to be observed in our havings. For how shall we communicate to the necessities of the saints, if we have not out of what we may communicate?  

Raban. But though there be a difference between having and loving riches, yet it is safer neither to have nor to love them.  

Remig. Whence in Mark the Lord expounding the meaning of this saying, speaks thus, “It is hard for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of heaven.” (Mark 10:24) They trust in riches, who build all their hopes on them.  

Jerome Because riches once gained are hard to be despised, He saith not it is impossible, but it is hard. Difficulty does not imply the impossibility, but points out the infrequency of the occurrence.  

Hilary It is a dangerous toil to become rich; and guiltlessness occupied in increasing its wealth has taken upon itself a sore burden; the servant of God gains not the things of the world, clear of the sins of the world. Hence is the difficulty of entering the kingdom of heaven.  

Chrys. Having said that it was hard for a rich man to eater into the kingdom of heaven, He now proceeds to show that it is impossible, “And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven.”  

Jerome According to this, no rich man can be saved. But if we read Isaiah, how the camels of Midian and Ephah came to Jerusalem with gifts and presents, (Isa 60:6) and they who once were crooked and bowed down by the weight of their sins, enter the gates of Jerusalem, we shall see how these camels, to which the rich are likened when they have laid aside the heavy load of sins, and the distortion of their whole bodies, may then enter by that narrow and strait way that leads to life.  

Pseudo-Chrys. The Gentile souls are likened to the deformed body of the camel, in which is seen the humpback of idolatry; for the knowledge of God is the exaltation of the soul. The needle is the Son of God, the fine point of which is His divinity, and the thicker part what He is according to His incarnation. But it is altogether straight and without turning; and through the womb of His passion, the Gentiles have entered into life eternal. By this needle is sewn the robe of immortality; it is this needle that has sewn the flesh to the spirit, that has joined together the Jews and the Gentiles, and coupled man in friendship with angels. It is easier therefore for the Gentiles to pass through the needle’s eye, than for the rich Jews to enter into the kingdom of heaven. For if the Gentiles are with such difficulty withdrawn from the irrational worship of idols, how much more hardly shall the Jews be withdrawn from the reasonable service of God?  

Gloss., ap. Anselm It is explained otherwise; That at Jerusalem there was a certain gate, called, The needle’s eye, through which a camel could not pass, but on its bended knees, and after its burden had been taken off; and so the rich should not be able to pass along the narrow way that leads to life, till he had put off the burden of sin, and of riches, that is, ceasing to love them.  

Greg., Mor., xxxv, 16 Or, by the rich man He intends any one who is proud, by the camel he denotes the right humility. The camel passed through the needle’s eye, when our Redeemer through the narrow way of suffering entered in to the taking upon Him death; for that passion was as a needle which pricked the body with pain. But the camel enters the needle’s eye easier than the rich man enters the kingdom of heaven; because if He had not first shown us by His passion the form of His humility, our proud stiffness would never have bent itself to His lowliness.  

Chrys. The disciples though poor are troubled for the salvation of others, beginning even now to have the bowels of doctors.  

Aug., Quaest. Ev., 1, 26 Whereas the rich are few in comparison of the multitude of the poor, we must suppose that the disciples understood all who wish for riches, as included in the number of the rich.  

Chrys. This therefore He proceeds to show is the work of God, there needing much grace to guide a man in the midst of riches; “But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.” By the word “beheld” them, the Evangelist conveys that He soothed their troubled soul by His merciful eye.  

Remig. This must not be so understood as though it were possible for God to cause that the rich, the covetous, the avaricious, and the proud should enter into the kingdom of heaven; but to cause him to be converted, and so enter.  

Chrys. And this is not said that you should sit supinely, and let alone what may seem impossibilities; but considering the greatness of righteousness, you should strive to enter in with entreaty to God.
