# Lecture 4

13. Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them.  

> 14. But Jesus said, “Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.”

> 15. And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.

> Pseudo-Chrys. The Lord had been holding discourse of chastity; and some of His hearers now brought unto Him infants, who in respect of chastity are the purest; for they supposed that it was the pure in body only whom He had approved; and this is that which is said, “Then were brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on them, and pray.”

Origen For they now understood from His previous mighty works, that by laying on of His hands and by prayer evils were obviated. They bring therefore children to Him, judging that it were impossible that after the Lord had by His touch conveyed divine virtue into them, harm or any daemon should come nigh them.  

Remig. For it was a custom among the ancients that little children should be brought to aged persons, to receive benediction by their hand or tongue; and according to this custom little children are now brought to the Lord.  

Pseudo-Chrys. The flesh as it delights not in good, if it hear any good readily forgets it; but the evil that it has it retains ever. But a little while before Christ took a little child and said, “Except ye become as this child, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven,” (Matt 18:3) yet His disciples, presently forgetting this innocence of children, now forbid children, as unworthy to come to Christ.  

Jerome Not because they liked not that they should have benediction of the Savior’s hand and mouth; but forasmuch as their faith was not yet perfect, they thought that He like other men would be wearied by the applications of those that brought them.  

Chrys. Or the disciples would have thrust them away, from respect to Christ’s dignity *(margin note: αξιωμα)*. But the Lord teaching them holy thoughts, and to subdue the pride of this world, took the children into His arms, and promised to such the kingdom of heaven; “But Jesus saith unto them, Suffer little children and forbid them not to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.”  

Pseudo-Chrys. For who were worthy to come to Christ, if simple infancy were thrust away? Therefore he said, “Forbid them not.” For if they shall turn out saints, why hinder ye the sons from coming to their Father? And if sinners, why do ye pronounce a sentence of condemnation, before you see any fault in them?  

Jerome And He said distinctly, “Of such is the kingdom of heaven,” not Of these, to show that it was not years, but disposition that determined His judgment, and that the reward was promised to such as had like innocence and simplicity.  

Pseudo-Chrys. The present passage instructs all parents to bring their children to the priests, for it is not the priest who lays his hands on them, but Christ, in whose name hands are laid. For if he that offers his food in prayer to God eats it sanctified, for it is sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer, as the Apostle speaks, *(marg. note: 1 Tim 4:5)* how much rather ought children to be offered to God, and sanctified? And this is the reason of blessing of food, “Because the whole world lieth in wickedness; (1 John 5:19) so that all things that have body, which are a great part of the world, lie in wickedness. Consequently infants when born, are as respects their flesh lying in wickedness.  

Origen Mystically; We call them children who are yet carnal in Christ, having need of milk. They who bring the babes to the Savior, are they who profess to have knowledge of the word, but are still simple, and have for their food children’s lessons, being yet novices. They who seem more perfect, and are therefore the disciples of Jesus, before they have learnt the way of righteousness which is for children, rebuke those who by simple doctrine bring to Christ children and babes, that is, such as are less learned. But the Lord exhorting His disciples now become men to condescend to the needs of babes, to be babes to babes, that they may gain babes, says, “For of such is the kingdom of heaven.” For He Himself also, when He was in the form of God, was made a babe. These things we should attend to, lest in esteeming that more excellent wisdom, and spiritual advancement, as though we were become great we should despise the little ones of the Church, forbidding children to be brought to Jesus. But since children cannot follow all things that are commanded them, Jesus laid His hands upon them, and leaving virtue in them by His touch, went away from them, seeing they were not able to follow Him, like the other more perfect disciples.  

Remig. Also laying His hands upon them, He blessed them, to signify that the lowly in spirit are worthy His grace and blessing.  

Gloss., non occ. He laid His hands upon them while men held them, to signify that the grace of His aid was necessary.  

Hilary The infants are a type of the Gentiles, to whom salvation is rendered by faith and hearing. But the disciples, in their first zeal for the salvation of Israel, forbid them to approach, but the Lord declares that they are not to be forbidden. For the gift of the Holy Spirit was to be conferred upon the Gentiles by laying on of hands, as soon as the Law had ceased.
