# Lecture 2

17. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them,  

> 18. “Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the Chief Priests and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,

> 19. And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again.”

> Chrys., Hom., lxv The Lord leaving Galilee, did not go up straightway to Jerusalem, but first wrought miracles, refuted the Pharisees, and taught the disciples concerning perfection of life, and its reward; now when about to go up to Jerusalem, He again speaks to them of His passion.

Origen Judas was yet among the twelve; for he was perhaps still worthy to hear in private along with the rest the things which his Master should suffer.  

Pseudo-Chrys. For the salvation of men entirely rests upon Christ’s death; nor is there any thing for which we are more bound to render thanks to God, than for His death. He imparted the mystery of His death to His disciples for this reason, namely, because the more precious treasure is ever committed to the more worthy vessels. Had the rest heard of the passion of Christ, the men might have been troubled because of the weakness of their faith, and the women because of the tenderness of their nature, which such matters do commonly move to tears.  

Chrys. He had indeed told it, and to many, but obscurely, as in that, “Destroy this temple;” (John 2:19) and again, “There shall no sign be given it but the sign of Jonas the Prophet.” (Matt 12:39) But now He imparted it clearly to His disciples.  

Pseudo-Chrys. That word “Behold,” is a word of stress, to bid them lay up in their hearts the memory of this present. He says, “We go up;” as much as to say, Ye see that I go of My free-will to death. When then ye shall see Me hang upon the cross, deem not that I am no more than human; for though to be able to die is human; yet to be willing to die is more than human.  

Origen Meditating then of this, we ought to know that often even when there is certain trial to be undergone, we ought to offer ourselves to it. But forasmuch as it was said above, When they persecute you in one city, flee ye to another,” (Matt 10:23) it belongs to the wise in Christ to judge when the season requires that he shun, and when that he go to meet dangers.  

Jerome He had often told His disciples of His passion, but because it might have slipped out of their recollection by reason of the many things they had heard in the mean while, now when He is going to Jerusalem, and going to take His disciples with Him, He fortifies them against the trial, that they should not be scandalized when the persecution and shame of the Cross should come.  

Pseudo-Chrys. For when sorrow comes at a time we are looking for it, it is found lighter than it would have been, had it taken us by surprise.  

Chrys. He forewarns them also in order that they should learn that He comes to His passion wittingly, and willingly. And at the first He had foretold only His death, but now that they are more disciplined, He brings forth yet more, as, “They shall deliver him to the Gentiles.”  

Raban For Judas delivered the Lord to the Jesus, and they delivered Him to the Gentiles, that is to Pilate, and the Roman power. To this end the Lord refused to be prosperous in this world, but rather chose to suffer affliction, that He might show us, who have yielded to delights, through how great bitterness we must needs return; whence it follows, “To mock, and to scourge, and to crucify.”  

Aug., City of God, xviii, 49 In His Passion we see what we ought to suffer for the truth, and in His resurrection what we ought to hope in eternity; whence it is said, “And shall rise again the third day.”  

Chrys. This was added, that when they should see the sufferings, they should look for the resurrection.  

Aug., de Trin., iv, 3 For one death, that namely of the Savior according to the body, was to us a salvation from two deaths, both of soul and body, and His one resurrection gained for us two resurrections. This ratio of two to one springs out of the number three; for one and two are three.  

Origen There is no mention that the disciples either said or did any thing upon hearing of these sufferings that should thus come upon Christ; remembering what the Lord had said to Peter, they were afraid they should have had the like or worse addressed to themselves. And yet there be scribes who suppose that they know the divine writings, who condemn Jesus to death, scourge Him with their tongues, and crucify Him herein, that they seek to take away His doctrine; but He, vanishing for a season, again rises to appear to those who received His word that it could be so.
