# Lecture 5

***29. And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.***

> 30. And, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, “Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David.”

> 31. And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace: but they cried the more, saying, “Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David.”

> 32. And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, “What will ye that I shall do unto you?”

> 33. They say unto him, “Lord, that our eyes may be opened.”

> 34. So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.

> Pseudo-Chrys. As the proof of the husbandman’s industry lies in the abundance of his crop, so the fullness of the Church is the evidence of an industrious teacher; so it is here said, “And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.” No one was deterred by the toilsomeness of the journey, for spiritual love feels no fatigue; no one was kept away by the thought of sufferings, for they were going into possession of the kingdom of heaven. For he who has in very deed tasted the reality of heavenly good, has nothing to attach him to earth. In good season these blind men come before Christ, that having their eyes opened, they may go up with Him to Jerusalem as witnesses to His power. They heard the sound of the passers by, but saw not their persons, and having nothing free about them but their voice, because they could not follow Him with their feet, they pursued Him with their voice; “When they heard that Jesus passed by, they cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David.”

Aug., de Cons. Ev., ii, 65 Mark relates this miracle, but speaks of only one blind man. This difficulty is thus explained; of the two blind men whom Matthew has introduced, one was well known in that city, as appears by Mark’s mentioning both his name, and that of his father. Bartimaeus the son of Timaeus was well known as having sunk from great affluence, and now sitting not only blind, but a beggar. For this reason then it is that Mark chose to mention him alone, because the restoration of his sight procured fame to the miracle, in proportion to the notoriety of the fact of his blindness. Though what Luke relates was done after the same manner, yet his account *(marg. note: Luke 18:35)* is to be taken of another though similar miracle. That which he gives was done as they drew near to Jericho; this in the other two as they came out of Jericho. “And the multitude rebuked them that they should hold their peace.”  

Pseudo-Chrys. For they saw how mean their clothes, and considered not how pure their consciences. See the foolish wisdom of men! They think great men are hurt when they receive the homage of the poor. What poor man dare salute a rich man in public?  

Hilary Or, They bid them hold their peace, not from reverence for Christ, but because they were grieved to hear from the blind what they denied, namely, that the Lord was the Son of David.  

Origen Or; Those that believed rebuked them that they should not dishonour Him by styling Him merely Son of David, but should rather say, Son of God, have mercy on us.  

Pseudo-Chrys. They were rather encouraged than repelled by this rebuke. For so faith is quickened by being prohibited; and hence is secure in dangers, and in security is endangered; whence it follows, But they cried out the more, saying, “Have mercy upon us, Son of David.” They cried out at the first because they were blind, now they rather cried out because they were forbidden to come to the Light.  

Chrys., Hom., lxvi Christ suffered them to be forbidden, that their desire might be the more evidenced. Hence learn that though we be repulsed, yet if we come to God with earnestness, of ourselves, we shall obtain that we ask. It follows, “And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I should do unto you?”  

Jerome Jesus stood still, because they being blind could not see their way. About Jericho were many pits, crags, and abrupt precipices; therefore the Lord stands still, that they might come to Him.  

Origen Or; Jesus does not pass on, but stands still, that by His standing His goodness may not pass by, but as from an abiding fount mercy may flow forth upon them.  

Jerome He commands that they be called to Him that the multitude may not withhold them; and He asks them what they would, that by their answer, their necessity may be made apparent, and His power be shown in their healing.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Or; He asks them on account of their faith, that whereas they who were blind confess Christ to be the Son of God, those who had their sight might be put to shame for their esteeming Him only man. They had indeed called Christ, “Lord,” and they had spoken true; but by calling Him the “Son of David,” they obliterated this their good confession. For indeed by a misuse of words men are called Lords, but none is truly Lord, but God only. When therefore they say, “O Lord, thou Son of David,” they thus misapply the term to Christ, as esteeming Him man; had they only called Him Lord, they would have confessed His Godhead. When then He asks them, “What would ye?” they no longer style Him Son of David, but only Lord; “They say unto Him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.” For the Son of David cannot open the eyes of the blind, but the Son of God can. So long then as they cried, “O Lord, thou Son of David,” their cure was delayed; as soon as they said, “Lord,” only, healing was shed upon them; for it follows, “And Jesus had compassion upon them, and touched their eyes, and straightway they saw.” He touched them carnally as man, He healed them as God.  

Jerome The Creator bestows what nature had not given; or at least mercy accords what weakness had withheld.  

Chrys. But as before this bounty they had been persevering, so after the receiving it they were not ungrateful.  

Pseudo-Chrys. On being healed they rendered a high service to Christ; for it follows, “And they followed him.” For this the Lord requires of thee, according to the Prophet, that “thou be careful to walk with the Lord thy God.” (Mic 6:8)  

Jerome They then who had sat shut up in Jericho, and knew only to cry with their voice, afterwards follow Jesus, not so much with their feet as in their virtues.  

Raban. But Jericho, which is interpreted ‘the moon,’ denotes the infirmity of our changefulness.  

Origen Figuratively, Jericho is taken to be the world, into which Christ came down. They who are in Jericho, know not how to escape from the wisdom of the world, unless they see not Jesus only coming out of Jericho, but also His disciples. This when they saw, great multitudes followed Him, despising the world and all worldly things, that under His guidance they may go up to the heavenly Jerusalem. The two blind men we may call Judah and Israel, who before the coming of Christ were blind, not seeing the true word which was in the Law and the Prophets, yet sitting by the wayside of the Law and the Prophets, and understanding Him only as after the flesh, they cried to Him who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh.  

Jerome By the two blind men are generally understood the Pharisees and Sadducees.  

Aug., Quaest. Ev., i, 28 Otherwise; The two blind men sitting by the wayside, denote certain of both nations already by faith coming in to that temporal dispensation, according to which Christ is the way, and seeking to be enlightened, that is, to know something concerning the eternity of the Word. This they desired to obtain from the Lord as He passed by, for the merit of that faith by which He is believed to be the Son of God, to have been born man, and to have suffered for us; for in this dispensation, Jesus, as it were, passes by, for all action is of this world. Also it behoved that they should cry out so loud as to overpower the din of the multitude that withstood them; that is, so to fortify their minds by perseverance and prayer, and mortifying continually the usage of fleshly lusts, (which as a crowd ever beset one that is endeavouring to come to the sight of eternal truth,) and by the straitest painfulness to get the better of the multitude of carnal men who hinder spiritual aspirations.  

Aug., Serm., 88, 13 For bad or lukewarm Christians are an hindrance to good Christians, who seek to perform the commandments of God. Notwithstanding these cry and faint not; for every Christian at his first setting about to live well and to despise the world, has to endure at the first the censures of cold Christians; but if he persevere, they will soon comply, who but now withstood him.  

Aug., Quaest. Ev., ii, 28 Jesus therefore, the same who said, “To him that knocketh it shall be opened,” hearing them, stands still, touches them, and gives them light. Faith in His temporal incarnation prepares us for the understanding of things eternal. By the passing by of Jesus they are admonished that they should be enlightened, and when He stands still they are enlightened; for things temporal pass by, but things eternal stand still.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Some interpret that the two blind men are the Gentiles; one sprung from Cham, the other from Japhet; they sat by the wayside, that is, they walked hard by the truth, but they could not find it out; or they were placed in reason, not having yet received knowledge of the Word.  

Raban. But recognizing the rumour of Christ, they desired to be made partakers of Him. Many spake against them; first the Jews, as we read in the Acts; then the Gentiles harassed them by persecution; but yet they might not deprive those who were preordained to life of salvation.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Accordingly Jesus touched the eyes of the Gentile mind, giving them the grace of the Holy Spirit, and when enlightened they followed Him with good works.  

Origen We also now sitting by the wayside of the Scriptures, and understanding wherein we are blind, if we ask with desire, He will touch the eyes of our souls, and the gloom of ignorance shall depart from our minds, that in the light of knowledge we may follow Him, who gave us power to see to no other end than that we should follow Him.
