# Lecture 5

***41. While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,***

> 42. Saying, “What think ye of Christ? whose son is he?” They say unto him, “The Son of David.”

> 43. He saith unto them, “How then doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying,

> 44. ‘The Lord saith unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool?’

> 45. If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?”

> 46. And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions.

> Pseudo-Chrys. The Jews tempted Christ, supposing Him to be mere man; had they believed Him to be the Son of God, they would not have tempted Him. Christ therefore, willing to show that He knew the treachery of their hearts, and that He was God, yet would not declare this truth to them plainly, that they might not take occasion thence to charge Him with blasphemy, and yet would not totally conceal this truth; because to that end had He come that He should preach the truth. He therefore puts a question to them, such as should declare to them who He was; “What think ye of Christ? whose Son is He?”

Chrys., Hom. lxxi He first asked His disciples what others said of Christ, and then what they themselves said; but not so to these. For they would have said that He was a deceiver, and wicked. They thought that Christ was to be mere man, and therefore “they say unto Him, The Son of David.” To reprove this, He brings forward the Prophet, witnessing His dominion, proper Sonship, and His joint honor with His Father.  

Jerome This passage is out of the 109th Psalm. Christ is therefore called David’s Lord, not in respect of His descent from him, but in respect of His eternal generation from the Father, wherein He was before His fleshly Father. And he calls Him Lord, not by a mere chance, nor of his own thought, but by the Holy Spirit.  

Remig. That He says, “Sit thou on my right hand,” is not to be taken as though God had a body, and either a right hand or a left hand; but to sit on the right hand of God is to abide in the honor and equality of the Father’s majesty.  

Pseudo-Chrys. I suppose that He formed this question, not only against the Pharisees, but also against the heretics; for according to the flesh He was truly David’s Son, but his Lord according to His Godhead.  

Chrys. But He rests not with this, but that they may fear, He adds, “Till I make thine enemies thy footstool;” that at least by terror He might gain them.  

Origen For God puts Christ’s enemies as a footstool beneath His feet, for their salvation as well as their destruction.  

Remig. But “till” is used for indefinite time, that the meaning be, Sit Thou for ever, and for ever hold thine enemies beneath thy feet.  

Gloss., ap. Anselm That it is by the Father that the enemies are put under the Son, denotes not the Son’s weakness, but the union of His nature with His Father. For the Son also puts under Him the Father’s enemies, when He glorifies His name upon earth. He concludes from this authority, “If David then call Him Lord, how is He his son?”  

Jerome This question is still available for us against the Jews; for these who believe that Christ is yet to come, assert that He is a mere man, though a holy one, of the race of David. Let us then thus taught by the Lord ask them, If He be mere man, and only the Son of David, how does David call Him his Lord? To evade the truth of this question, the Jews invent many frivolous answers. They allege Abraham’s steward, he whose son was Eliezer of Damascus, and say that this Psalm was composed in his person, when after the overthrow of the five kings, the Lord God said to his lord Abraham, “Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool.” Let us ask how Abraham could say the things that follow, and compel them to tell us how Abraham was born before Lucifer, and how he was a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, for whom Melchisedech brought bread and wine, and of whom he received tithes of the spoil?  

Chrys. This conclusion He put to their questionings, as final, and sufficient to stop their mouth. Henceforward accordingly they held their peace, not by their own good-will, but from not having aught to say.  

Origen For had their question sprung of desire to know, He would never have proposed to them such things as should have deterred them from asking further.  

Raban. Hence we learn that the poison of jealousy may be overcome, but can hardly of itself rest at peace.
