# Lecture 4

14. “Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.”  

> Chrys., Hom. lxxiii Next the Lord rebukes them for their g1uttony, and what was the worst, that not from the rich but from widows they took wherewith to fill their bellies, thus burdening the poverty of those whom they should have relieved.

Gloss., interlin. “Devour widows’ houses,” that is, your superstitions have this only aim, namely, to make a gain of the people that are put under you.  

Pseudo-Chrys. The female sex is imprudent, as not contemplating with reason all that it sees or hears; and weak, as being easily turned either from bad to good, or from good to bad. The male sex is more prudent and hardy. And therefore pretenders to holiness practise most upon women, who are unable to see their hypocrisy, and are easily inclined to love them on the ground of religion. But widows they chiefly choose to attempt; first, because a woman who has her husband to advise her is not so readily deceived; and second, she has not the means of giving, being in the power of her husband. The Lord then, whilst He confounds the Jewish Priests, instructs the Christian that they should not frequent widows rather than others, for though their purpose may not be bad, it gives occasion to suspicions.  

Chrys. The manner of this plundering is grievous, for they make long prayers. Every one who does evil deserves punishment; but be who takes occasion for his offense from religion, deserves more severe punishment; “Therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.”  

Pseudo-Chrys. First, for that ye are wicked, and then because ye put on the cloak of sanctity. Your covetousness you dress up in the colour of religion, and use God’s arms in the Devil’s service, that iniquity may be loved while it is thought to be piety.  

Hilary Or, because their observance of the kingdom of heaven proceeds hence, that they may keep up their practice of going about to widows’ houses, they shall therefore receive the heavier judgment, as having their own sin and the ignorance of others to answer for.  

Gloss., interlin. Or, because “the servant that knew his Lords will and did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.” (Luke 12:47)
