# Lecture 2

3. And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, “Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?”  

> 4. And Jesus answered and said unto them, “Take heed that no man deceive you.

> 5. For many shall come in my name, saying, ‘I am Christ;’ and shall deceive many.”

> Remig. The Lord continuing His walk arrives at Mount Olivet, having by the way foretold the destruction of the temple to those disciples who had shown and commended the buildings. When they had reached the Mount they came to Him, asking Him further of this.

Chrys. They asked Him in private, because they were great things about which they were going to ask Him. They wished to know the day of His coming, for the vehement desire they had to see His glory.  

Jerome They ask Him three things. First, The time of the destruction of Jerusalem, saying, “Tell us when shall these things be?” Second, The time of Christ’s coming, saying, “And what shall be the sign of Thy coming?” Third, The time of the consummation of this world, saying, “And of the end of the world?”  

Chrys. Luke speaks of one enquiry, that concerning Jerusalem, as though the disciples supposed that Christ’s coming should be then, and the end of the world should be when Jerusalem should be destroyed. Whereas Mark does not state them all to have asked concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, but Peter, James, John, and Andrew, as having more bold and free speech with Christ.  

Origen I think Mount Olivet to be a mystery of the Church out of the Gentiles.  

Remig. For Mount Olivet has no unfruitful trees, but olives, which supply light to dispel darkness, which give rest to the weary, health to the sick. And sitting on Mount Olivet over against the temple, the Lord discourses of its destruction, and the destruction of the Jewish nation, that even by His choice of a situation He might show, that abiding still in the Church He condemns the pride of the wicked.  

Origen For the husbandman dwelling on Mount Olivet is the word of God confirmed in the Church, that is, Christ, who ever grafts the branches of the wild olive on the good olive tree of the Fathers. They who have confidence before Christ, seek to learn the sign of the coming of Christ, and of the consummation of this world. And the coming of the Word into the soul is of two sorts. The first is that foolish preaching concerning Christ, when we preach that Christ was born and crucified; the second its coming in perfect men, concerning which it is said, “We speak wisdom among them that are perfect;” (1 Cor 2:6) and to this second coming is added the end of the world in the perfect man to whom the world is crucified.  

Hilary And because the questions of the disciples are threefold, they are separated by different times and meanings. That concerning the destruction of the city is first answered, and is then confirmed by truth of doctrine, that no seducer might prevail with the ignorant.  

Chrys. His first answer is neither concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, nor concerning His second coming, but concerning the evils which were to be immediately encountered.  

Jerome One of them of whom He speaks was Simon of Samaria, of whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that he gave himself out to be the great Power, leaving these things written in his works *(ed. note: “The followers of Simon and Cleobius compose books in the name of Christ and His disciples, which they circulate, and so deceive men.” Apostol. Const. The author of the Treatise De Divinis Nomin. also mentions “Simon’s Controversial Discourses.” Vallarsi.)* among others, I am the Word of God, I am the Almighty, I am all things of God. The Apostle John also in his Epistle, “Ye have heard that Antichrist shall come; even now there are many Antichrists.” (1 John 2:18) I suppose all heresiarchs. to be Antichrists, and under the name of Christ to teach those things which are contrary to Christ. No wonder if we see some led away by such teachers, when the Lord has said, “And shall deceive many.”  

Origen They that are deceived are many, because “wide is the gate that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.” (Matt 7:13) This one thing is enough to detect the Antichrists and seducers, that they shall say, “I am Christ,” which Christ Himself is no where read to have said: for the works of God, and the word which He taught, and His power, were enough to produce belief that He is Christ. For every discourse which professes to expound Scripture faithfully, and has not the truth, is Antichrist. For the truth is Christ, that which feigns itself to be the truth is Antichrist. So also all virtues are Christ, all that feigns itself to be virtue is Antichrist; for Christ has in Himself in truth all manner of good for the edification of men, but the devil has forged resemblances of the same for the deceiving of the saints. We have need therefore of God to help us, that none deceive us, neither word nor power. It is a bad thing to find any one erring in his course of life; but I esteem it much worse not to think according to the most true rule of Scripture.
