# Lecture 6

23. “Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not.  

> 24. For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.

> 25. Behold, I have told you before.

> 26. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not.

> 27. For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

> 28. For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

> Chrys. When the Lord had finished all that related to Jerusalem, He came in the rest to His own coming, and gives them signs thereof, useful not for them only, but for us and for all who shall be after us. As above, the Evangelist said, “In those days came John the Baptist,” (Matt 3:1) not implying immediately after what had gone before, but thirty years after; so here, when He says, “Then,” He passes over the whole interval of time between the taking of Jerusalem and the beginnings of the consummation of the world. Among the signs which He gives of His second coming He certifies them concerning the place, and the deceivers. For it shall not be then as at His former coming, when He appeared in Bethlehem, in a corner of the world, unknown of any; but He shall come openly so as not to need any to announce His approach. Wherefore, “If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe not.”

Jerome Wherein He shows that His second coming shall be not in lowliness as His first, but in glory; and therefore it is folly to seek in places little and obscure for Him who is the Light of the whole world. *(note: John 8:12)*  

Hilary Notwithstanding, by reason of the great tribulation in which men shall be cast, false prophets promising to show aid present from Christ, will falsely affirm that Christ is present in diverse places, that they may draw into the service of Antichrist men discouraged and distracted.  

Chrys. He speaks here of Antichrist, and of certain his ministers, whom He calls false Christs and false prophets, such as were many in the time of the Apostles; but before Christ’s second coming there shall come others more bitter than the former, “And they shall show great signs and wonders.” (2 Thes 2:9)  

Aug., Lib. 83, Quaest., Q79 Here the Lord forewarns us that even wicked men shall do some miracles which the saints cannot do, yet are they not therefore to be thought to have a higher place in the sight of God. For the Egyptian magi were not more acceptable to God than the people of Israel, because they could do what the Israelites could not; yet did Moses, by the power of God, work greater things. This gift is not bestowed on all the saints, lest the weak should be led astray by a most destructive error, supposing such powers to be higher gifts than those works of righteousness by which eternal life is secured. And though magi do the same miracles that the saints do, yet are they done with a different end, and through a different authority; for the one do them seeking the glory of God, the others seeking their own glory; these do them by some special compact or privilege *(. note: al. veneficia)* granted to the Powers, within their sphere, those by the public dispensation and the command of Him to whom all creation is subject *(ed. note: see above on chap. vii, 22)*. For it is one thing for the owner of a horse to be compelled to give it up to a soldier, another for him to hand it over to a purchaser, or to give or lend it to a friend; and as those evil soldiers, who are condemned by the imperial discipline, employ the imperial ensigns to terrify the owners of any property, and to extort from them what is not required by the public service; so some evil Christians, by means of the name of Christ, or by words or sacraments Christian, compel somewhat from the Powers; yet these, when thus at the bidding of evil men, they depart from their purpose, they depart in order to deceive men in whose wanderings they rejoice. It is one way then in which magi, another in which good Christians, another in which bad Christians, work miracles; the magi by a private compact, good Christians by the public righteousness, evil Christians by the signs of public righteousness. *(. note: non occ.)* And we ought not to wonder at this when we believe not unreasonably that all that we see happen is wrought by the agency of the inferior powers of this air.  

Aug., de Trin., iii, 8 Yet are we not therefore to think that this visible material world attends the nod of the disobedient angels, but rather the power is given them of God. Nor are we to suppose that such evil angels have creative power, but by their spirituality they know the seeds of things which are bidden from us, and these they secretly scatter by suitable adaptations of the elements, and so they give occasion both to the whole being, and the more rapid increase of substances. For so there are many men who know what sort of creatures use to be generated out of certain herbs, meats, juices and humours, bruised and mingled together in a certain fashion; save only that it is harder for men to do these things, inasmuch as they lack that subtlety of sense, and penetrativeness of body in their limbs dull and of earthly mould.  

Greg., Mor. xv, 61 When then Antichrist shall have wrought wonderful prodigies before the eyes of the carnal, he shall draw men after him, all such as delight in present goods, surrendering themselves irrevocably to his sway, “Insomuch that if it were possible the very elect should be led astray.”  

Origen That, “If it were possible,” is spoken hyperbolically; not that the elect can be led astray, but He wishes to show that the discourse of heretics is often so persuasive, as to have force to prevail even with those who act *(. note: al. audiunt)* wisely.  

Greg., Mor., xxxiii, 36 Or, because the heart of the elect is assailed with fearful thoughts, yet their faithfulness is not shaken, the Lord comprehends both under the same sentence, for to waver in thought is to err. He adds, “If it were possible,” because it is not possible that the elect should be taken in error.  

Raban. He says not this because it is possible for the divine election to be defeated, but because they, who to men’s judgment seemed elect, shall be led into error.  

Greg., Hom. in Ev., xxxv, i And as darts, when foreseen, are less likely to hit, He adds, “Lo, I have told you.” Our Lord announces the woes which are to precede the destruction of the world, that when they come they may alarm the less from having been foreknown.  

Hilary The false prophets, of whom He had spoken above, shall say of Christ one while, “Lo, He is in the desert,” in order that they may cause men to wander astray; another while, “Lo, He is in the secret chambers,” that they may enthral men under the dominion of Antichrist. But the Lord declares Himself to be neither lurking in a remote corner, nor shut up to be visited singly, but that He shall be exhibited to the view of all, and in every place, “As the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be.”  

Chrys. As He had above described in what guise Antichrist should come, so here He describes how He Himself shall come. For as the lightning needeth none to herald or announce it, but is in an instant of time visible throughout the whole world, even to those that are sitting in their chambers, so the coming of Christ shall be seen every where at once, because of the brightness of His glory. Another sign He adds of His coming, “Wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered together.” The eagles denote the company of the Angels, Martyrs, and Saints.  

Jerome By an instance from nature, which we daily see, we are instructed in a sacrament of Christ. Eagles and vultures are said to scent dead bodies even beyond sea, and to flock to feed upon them. If then birds, not having the gift of reason, by instinct alone find out where lays a dead body, separated by so great space of country, how much more ought the whole multitude of believers to hasten to Christ, whose lightning goeth forth out of the east, and shines even to the west? We may understand by the carcase here, or corpse (πτωμα), which in the Latin is more expressively ‘cadaver,’ an allusion to the passion of Christ’s death.  

Hilary That we might not be ignorant of the place in which He should come, He adds this, “Wheresoever the carcase, &c.” He calls the Saints “eagles,” from the spiritual flight of their bodies, and shows that their gathering shall be to the place of His passion, the Angels guiding them thither; and rightly should we look for His coming in glory there, where He wrought for us eternal glory by the suffering of His bodily humiliation.  

Origen And observe, He says not vultures or crows, but “eagles,” showing the lordliness and royalty of all who have believed in the Lord’s passion.  

Jerome They are called eagles whose youth is renewed as the eagle’s, and who take to themselves wings that they may come to Christ’s passion. *(. note: Ps 103:5, Isa 40:31)*  

Greg., Mor. xxxi, 53 We may understand this, “Wheresoever the carcase is,” as meaning, I who incarnate sit on the throne of heaven, as soon as I shall have loosed the souls of the elect from the flesh, will exalt them to heavenly places.  

Jerome Or otherwise ; This may be understood of the false prophets. At the time of the Jewish captivity, there were many leaders who declared themselves to be Christs, *(. note: Josephus, B. J., v. 1)* so that while the Romans were actually besieging them, there were three factions within. But it is better taken as we expounded it above, of the end of the world. Third, it may be understood of the warfare of the heretics against the Church, and of those Antichrists, who under pretext of false science, fight against Christ.  

Origen The genus of Antichrist is one, the species many, just as all lies are of one sort. As all the holy Prophets were Prophets of the true Christ, so understand that each false Christ shall have his own false Prophets, who shall preach as true the false teachings of some Antichrist. When then one shall say, “Lo, here is Christ, or lo, there,” we need not look abroad out of the Scriptures, for out of the Law, the Prophets, and the Apostles, they bring the things which seem to favour their lie. Or by this, “Lo, here is Christ, or lo, there,” they show that it was not Christ, but some impostor under the same title, such for example as Marcion, or Valentinus, or Basilides taught.  

Jerome If then any one assert to you that Christ tarries in “the desert” of the Gentiles, or in the teaching of the Philosophers, or in “the secret chambers” of the heretics, who promise the hidden things of God, believe Him not, but believe that the Catholic Faith shines from “east to west” in the Churches.  

Aug., Quaest. Ev., i, 38 By the “east” and “west,” He signifies the whole world, throughout which the Church should be. In the same way as He said below, “Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man coming in the clouds, of heaven,” (Matt 26:64) so now He likens His coming to lightning, which uses to flash out of the clouds. When then the authority of the Church is set up clear and manifest throughout the whole world, He suitably warns His disciples that they should not believe schismatics and heretics. Each schism and heresy holds its own place, either occupying some important position in the earth, or ensnaring men’s curiosity in obscure and remote conventicles. “Lo, here is Christ, or lo, there,” refers to some district or province of the earth; “the secret chambers,” or “the desert,” signify the obscure and lurking conventicles of heretics.  

Jerome Or by this, “in the desert,” or “in the secret chambers,” He means that in times of persecution and distress, the false Prophets always find place for deceiving.  

Origen Or, when they allege secret and before unpublished Scriptures, in proof of their lie, they seem to say, Lo, the word of truth is in the desert. But when they produce canonical Scripture in which all Christians agree, they seem to say, Lo, the word of truth is in the chambers. Or wishing to point out such discourses as are altogether without Scripture, He said, “If they shall say to you, Lo, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not.” Truth is like the “lightning that cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west.” Or this may mean, that truth can be supported out of every passage of Scripture. The lightning of truth comes out of “the east,” that is, from the first beginnings of Christ, and shines throughout even to His passion, which is His setting; or from the very beginning of creation, to the last Scripture of the Apostles. Or, “the east” is the Law, “the west” is the end of the Law, and of John’s prophecy. The Church alone neither takes away word or meaning from this lightning, nor adds aught to its prophecy. Or He means that we should give no heed to those who say, “Lo, here is Christ,” but show Him not in the Church, in which alone is the coming or the Son of Man, who said, “Lo, I am with you, always even to the end of the world.” (Matt 28:20)  

Jerome We are invited to flock to Christ’s passion wheresoever in Scripture it read of, that through it we may be able to come to God’s word.
