# Lecture 4

9. “Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.  

> 10. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.

> 11. And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.

> 12. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.

> 13. But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

> 14. And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations ; and then shall the end come.”

> Raban. For what desert so many evils are to be brought upon Jerusalem, and the whole Jewish province the Lord shows, when He adds, “Then shall they deliver you up, &c.”

Chrys. Or otherwise; The disciples when they heard these things which were spoken of Jerusalem might suppose that they should be beyond reach of harm, as though what they now heard was the sufferings of others, while they themselves should meet with nothing but prosperous times, He therefore announces the grievous things which should befal them, putting them in fear for themselves. First He had bid them be on their guard against the arts of false teachers, He now foretels to them the violence of tyrants. In good season He thus introduces their own woes, as here they will receive consolation from the common calamities; and He held out to them not this comfort only, but also that of the cause for which they should suffer, showing that it was for His name’s sake, “And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake.”  

Origen But how should the people of Christ be hated by the nations who dwelt in the uttermost parts of the earth? But one may perhaps say, that in this place all is put hyperbolically for many. But this that He says, “Then shall they deliver you,” presents some difficulty; for before these things the Christians were delivered to tribulation. To this it may be answered, that at that time the Christians shall be more delivered to tribulation than ever. And persons in any misfortune love to examine into the origin of them, and to talk about them. Hence when the worship of the Gods shall be almost deserted by reason of the multitude of Christians, it will be said that that is the cause of the wars, and famines, and pestilences; and of the earthquakes also they will say that the Christians are the cause, whence the persecution of the Churches.  

Chrys. Having named two sources of opposition, that from seducers, and that from enemies, He adds a third, that from false brethren; “And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.” See Paul bewailing these same things, “Without were fightings, within were fears;” (2 Cor 7:5) and in another place; “In perils among false brethren,” (2 Cor 11:26) of whom he says, “Such are false Apostles, deceitful workers.” (2 Cor 11:13)  

Remig. As the capture of Jerusalem approached, many rose up, calling themselves Christians, and deceived many , such Paul calls “false brethren,” John “Antichrists.”  

Hilary Such Was Nicolaus, one of the seven deacons, who led astray many by his pretences. And Simon Magus who, armed with diabolic works and words, perverted many by false miracles.  

Chrys. And He adds, what is still more cruel, that such false Prophets shall have no alleviation in charity; “Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.”  

Remig. That is, true love towards God and our neighbor, in proportion as each surrenders himself to iniquity, in that proportion will the flame of charity in his heart be extinguished.  

Jerome Observe, He says, “the love of many,” not ‘of all,’ for in the Apostles, and those like them, love would continue, as Paul speaks, “Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?” (Rom 8:35)  

Remig. “Whoso shall endure unto the end,” i.e., to the end of his life; for whoso to the end of his life shall persevere in the confession of the name of Christ, and in love, he shall be saved.  

Chrys. Then that they should not say, How then shall we live among so many evils? He promises not only that they should live, but that they should teach every where. “And this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world.”  

Remig. For the Lord knew that the hearts of the disciples would be made sad by the destruction of Jerusalem, and overthrow of their nation, and He therefore comforts them with a promise that more of the Gentiles should believe than of the Jews should perish.  

Chrys. That before the taking of Jerusalem the Gospel was preached every where, hear what Paul says, “Their sound is gone out into all the earth;” (Rom 10:18) and see himself travelling from Jerusalem into Spain. And if one had so large a province, think how much all must have done. Whence writing to certain, he says of the Gospel, “It bears fruit, and increases in every creature under heaven.” (Col 1:6). And this is the strongest proof of Christ’s power, that in thirty years or a little more, the word of the Gospel filled the ends of the world. Though the Gospel was preached every where, yet all did not believe, whence He adds, “For a witness unto all nations,” in accusation, that is, of such as believe not, they who have believed bearing witness against them that believed not, and condemning them. And in fit season did Jerusalem fall, namely, after the Gospel had been preached throughout the world; as it follows, “And then shalt the consummation come,” i.e., the end of Jerusalem. For they who have seen Christ’s power shining forth every where, and in brief space spread over the whole world, what mercy did they deserve when they continued still in ingratitude?  

Remig. But the whole passage might be referred to the end of the world. For then “shall many be offended,” and depart from the faith, when they see the numbers and wealth of the wicked, and the miracles of Antichrist, and they shall persecute their brethren; and Antichrist shall send “false Prophets, who shall deceive many; iniquity shall abound,” because the number of the wicked shall be increased; and “love shall wax cold,” because the number of the good shall diminish.  

Jerome And the sign of the Lord’s second coming is, that the Gospel shall be preached in all the world, so that all may be without excuse.  

Origen And that, “Ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake,” might be then applied thus; That indeed at this time all nations are conspired together against the Christians, but that when the things foretold by Christ shall have come to pass, then there shall be persecutions, not as before in places, but everywhere against the people of God.  

Aug., Ep. 199, 46 But that this preaching “the Gospel of the kingdom in all the world” was accomplished by the Apostles, we have not any certain evidence, to prove. There are numberless barbarous nations in Africa, among whom the Gospel is not even yet preached, as it is easy to learn from the prisoners who are brought from thence. But it cannot be said that these have no part in the promise of God. For God promised with an oath not the Romans only, but all nations to the seed of Abraham. But in whatever nation there is yet no Church established, it must needs be that there should be one, not that all the people should believe; for how then should that be fulfilled, “Ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake,” unless there be in all nations those who hate and those who are hated? That preaching therefore was not accomplished by the Apostles, while as yet there were nations among whom it had not begun to be fulfilled. The words of the Apostle also, “Their sound hath gone out into all the world,” though expressed as of time past, are meant to apply to something future, not yet completed; as the Prophet *(. note: Ps 19:4)*, whose words he quotes, said that the Gospel bore fruit and grew in the whole world, to show thereby to what extent its growth should come. If then we know not when it shall be that the whole world shall be filled with the Gospel, undoubtedly we know not when the end shall be; but it shall not be before such time.  

Origen When every nation shall have heard the preaching of the Gospel, then shall come the end of the world. For at this time there are many nations, not of barbarians only, but of our own, who have not yet heard the word of Christianity.  

Gloss., non occ. *(ed. note)* *(This Gloss appears to be a note of S. Thomas, in confirmation of the view of S. Chrysostom, which refers this to the taking of Jerusalem. cf. Iren Haeres. i. 2 and 3.)*: But it is possible to maintain both applications of the passage, if only we will take this diffusion of Gospel preaching in a double sense. If we understand it of fruit produced by the preaching, and the foundation in every nation of a Church of believers in Christ, as Augustine (in the passage above quoted) expounds it, then it is a sign which ought to precede the end of the world, and which did not precede the destruction of Jerusalem. But if we understand it of the fame of their preaching, then it was accomplished before the destruction of Jerusalem, when Christ’s disciples had been dispersed over the four quarters of the earth.  

Whence Jerome says, I do not suppose that there remained any nation which knew not the name of Christ; for where preacher had never been, some notion of the faith must have been communicated by neighbouring nations. *(. note: Hieron. in loc.)*  

Origen Morally; He who shall see that glorious second coming of the word of God into his soul, must needs suffer in proportion to the measure of his proficiency assaults of opposing influences, and Christ in him must be hated by all, not only by the nations literally understood, but by the nations of spiritual vices. And in such enquiries there will be few who shall reach the truth with any fullness, the more part shall be offended and fall therefrom, betraying and accusing one another because of their disagreement respecting doctrines, which shall give rise to a mutual hatred. Also there shall be many setting forth unsound words concerning things to come, and interpreting the Prophets in a manner in which they ought not; these are the false Prophets who shall deceive many, and who shall cause to wax cold that fervour of love which was before in the simplicity of the faith. But he who can abide firmly in the Apostolic tradition, he shall be saved; and the Gospel being preached to the minds of all shall be for a testimony to all nations, that is, to all the unbelieving thoughts of the soul.
