# Lecture 8

30. “And they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.”  

> Chrys. He adds this, that having heard of the cross, they should not now imagine a similar degradation.

Aug., Ep. 199, 41 The first and most apparent meaning of this is of that time when He shall come to judge the quick and the dead in His body—that body in which He sits at the right hand of the Father, in which He died and rose again and ascended into heaven. As we read in the Acts of the Apostles; “He was taken up, and a cloud received Him out their sight,” (Acts 1:9) upon which it was said by the Angels, “He shall so come as ye have seen Him go into heaven,” we may reasonably believe that He will come again, not only in the same body, but also in a cloud.  

Origen Therefore shall they see with the bodily eyes the Son of Man, coming in human shape, “in the clouds of heaven,” that is, on high. As at the transfiguration, a voice came out of the cloud, so when He shall come again transformed into His glorious appearance, it shall be not on one cloud, but upon many, which shall be His chariot. And if when the Son of God went up to Jerusalem, they who loved Him spread their garments in the way, not willing that even the ass that carried Him should tread upon the earth; what wonder, if the Father and God of all should spread the clouds of heaven under the body of the Son, when He comes to the work of the consummation? And one may say, that as in the creation of man, God took clay from the earth and made man; so to manifest the glory of Christ, the Lord taking of the heaven, and of its substance, gave it a body of a bright cloud in the Transfiguration, and of bright clouds at the Consummation; wherefore it is here said, “in the clouds of heaven,” as it was there said, “of the clay of the ground.” (Gen 2:7) And it behoves the Father to give all such admirable gifts to the Son, because He humbled Himself; and He has also exalted Him, not only spiritually, but bodily, that He should come upon such clouds; and perhaps upon rational clouds, that even the chariot of the glorified Son of Man should not be irrational. At the first, Jesus came with that power with which He wrought signs and wonders in the people; yet was that power little in comparison of that great power with which He shall come in the end; for that was the power of one emptying Himself of power. And also, it is fitting that He should be transformed into greater glory than at the transfiguration on the mount; for then He was transfigured for the sake of three only, but in the consummation of the whole world, He shall appear in great glory, that all may see Him in glory.  

Aug. But because the Scriptures are to be searched, and we are not to content ourselves with the surface of them, let us look closely at what follows, “When ye see all these things come to pass, know that he is near even at the door.” We know then that He is near, when we see come to pass not any of the foregoing things, but all of them, among which is this that the Son of Man shall be seen coming. “And he shall send his Angels,” who from the four quarters of the world shall gather together His elect. All these things He does at “the last hour” (1 John 2:18) coming in His members as in the clouds, or in the whole Church as in one great cloud, as now He ceases not to come. And “with great power and glory,” because His power and glory will seem greater in the Saints to whom He will give great power, that they may not be overcome of persecution.  

Origen Or He comes every day “with great power” to the mind of the believer in the clouds of prophecy, that is, in the Scriptures of the Prophets and the Apostles, who utter the word of God with a meaning above human nature. Also we say that to those who understand He comes with “great glory,” and that this is the more seen in the second coming of the Word which is to the perfect. And so it may be, that all which the three Evangelists have said concerning Christ’s coming, if carefully compared together and thoroughly examined, would be found to apply to His continual daily coming in His body, which is the Church, of which coming He said in another place, “Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man. sitting on the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven,” (Matt 26:6) excepting those places in which He promises that His last coming in His own person.
