# Lecture 7

29. “Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken:  

> 30. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn.”

> Gloss., non occ. As soon as the Lord has fortified the believers against the arts of Antichrist and his ministers, by showing that His coming would be public, He proceeds to show the order and method of His coming.

Chrys. By the tribulation, He means the times of Antichrist and the false Prophets; for when there are so many deceivers, the tribulation will be great. But it shall not extend through any great length of time. For if for the elect’s sake the Jewish war is shortened, much more shall this tribulation be shortened for their sakes; for which reason He said not “After,” but “Immediately after,” for He shall come immediately after.  

Hilary The darkening of the sun, the failing of the moon, and the fall of the stars, indicate the glories of His coming.  

Origen One will say, As at the breaking out of great conflagrations, great darkness is at the first caused by the smoke, so when the world shall be consumed by fire, which shall be kindled, even the great luminaries shall be darkened; and when the light of the stars is decayed, the rest of their substance, incapable of exaltation, shall fall from heaven into what it was, when it was first raised aloft by the light. When this shall have taken place, it follows that the rational heavenly powers shall suffer dismay and derangement, and shall be suspended from their functions. “And then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven,” that sign by which the heavenly things were made, that is, the power which the Son wrought when He hung upon the cross. And the sign shall appear in heaven, that men of all tribes who before had not believed Christianity when preached, then by that sign, acknowledging it as made plain, shall grieve and mourn for their ignorance and sins. Others will think otherwise, that as the light of a lamp dies away by degrees, so when the supply of the heavenly luminaries shall fail, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon and the light of the stars shall grow dim, and that which in their composition is earthy shall fall from heaven. But how can it be said of the sun that its light shall be darkened, when Esaias the Prophet declares, that in the end of the world, there shall be light proceeding forth from the sun? (Isa 30:26) And of the moon he declares that it shall be as the sun. But concerning the stars, there are some that endeavour to convince us that all, or many of them, are larger than the whole earth. How then shall they fall from heaven, when this earth would not be large enough to contain them?  

Jerome These things, therefore, shall not come to pass by any diminution of light, for in another place we read that the light of the sun shall be sevenfold; but by comparison with real light, all things shall seem dim.  

Raban. But nothing hinders our supposing that the sun and moon with the other stars shall for a time lose their light, as we know did the sun at the time of the Lord’s passion; as Joel also says, “The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon blood, before the great and manifest day of the Lord come.” (Joel 2:31) But when the day of judgment is passed, and the life of future glory shall dawn, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth, then shall that come to pass of which Isaiah speaks, “The light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold. The stars shall fall from heaven,” (Isa 30:26) is expressed in Mark; “There shall be stars falling from heaven,” (Mark 13:25) that is, lacking their proper light.  

Jerome “By the powers of heaven,” we understand the bands of the Angels.  

Chrys. Very fitly shall they be shaken and dismayed, seeing so mighty a change being wrought, their fellow-servants punished, and the universe standing before a terrible tribunal.  

Origen But as, at the dispensation of the Cross, the sun was eclipsed, and darkness was spread over the earth; so when the sign of the Son of Man appears in heaven, the light of the sun, moon, and stars, shall fail, as though waning before the might of that sign. This we understand to be the sign of the cross, that the Jews. may see, as Zacharias and John speak, “Him whom they have pierced,” (Zech 12:10, John 19:37) and the sign of victory.  

Chrys. But because the sun will be darkened, the cross would not be seen, if it were not far brighter than the rays of the sun. That the disciples might not be ashamed, and grieve over the cross, He speaks of it as a sign, with a kind of distinction. The sign of the cross will appear to overthrow the shamelessness of the Jews, when Christ shall appear in the judgment, showing not only His wounds, but His most ignominious death, “And then all the tribes of the earth shall mourn.” For when they shall see the cross, they shall bethink them how they have gained naught by His death, and that they have crucified Him whom they ought to have worshipped.  

Jerome Rightly does He say, “the tribes of the earth,” for they shall mourn who have no citizenship in heaven, but are written in earth. (Jer 17:13)  

Origen Morally, one may say that the sun, which shall be darkened, is the Devil, who shall be convicted in the end of the world, that whereas he is darkness, he has feigned himself to be the sun; the moon, which seems to receive its light from this sun, is the Church of the wicked, which professes to have and to give light, but then convicted with its sinful dogmas, shall lose its brightness; and all those who, either by false teaching, or false virtues, promised truth to men, but led them astray by lies, these are fitly called stars falling from, so to say, their own heaven, where they were raised on high, exalting themselves against the knowledge of God. For illustration of this discourse, we may apply that place in Proverbs, which says, “The light of the just is unquenchable, but the light of the wicked shall be quenched.” (Prov 4:18) Then the brightness of God shall appear in every one who has borne the image of the heavenly; and they of heaven shall rejoice, but they of earth shall lament.  

Aug., Ep. 199, 39 Or, the Church is the sun, moon, and stars, to which it is said, “Fair as the moon, bright as the sun. Then shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light,” (Song of Songs 6:10) because in that ungoverned fury of wicked persecutors, the Church shall not be seen. “Then shall the stars fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken,” because many, who seemed to be shining in God’s grace, shall give way to their persecutors, and shall fall, and even the stoutest believers shall be shaken. And these things shall be “after the tribulation of those days,” not because they shall happen when the whole persecution is overpast, but because the tribulation shall be first, that the falling away may come after. And because it shall be so throughout all those days, it shall be “after the tribulation of those days,” yet on those very days.
