# Lecture 15

55. In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, “Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.  

> 56. But all this was done, that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

> 57. And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the High Priest, where the Scribes and the elders were assembled.

> 58. But Peter followed him afar off unto the High Priest’s palace, and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.

> Origen Having commanded Peter to put up his sword, which was an instance of patience, and having (as another Evangelist writes *(. note: Luke 22:51)*) healed the ear that was cut off, which waS an instance of the greatest mercy, and of Divine power, it now follows, “In that hour said Jesus to the multitudes, (to the end that if they could not remember His past goodness, they might at least confess His present,) Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me?”

Remig. As much as to say, Robbers assault and study concealment; I have injured no one, but have healed many, and have ever taught in your synagogues.  

Jerome It is folly then to seek with swords and staves Him who offers Himself to your hands, and with a traitor to hunt out, as though lurking under cover of night, one who is daily teaching in the temple.  

Chrys. They did not lay hands on Him in the temple because they feared the multitude, therefore also the Lord went forth that He might give them place and opportunity to take Him. This then teaches them, that if He had not suffered them of His own free choice, they would never have had strength to take Him. Then the Evangelist assigns the reason why the Lord was willing to be taken, adding, “All this was done that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled.”  

Jerome “They pierced my hands and my feet;” (Ps 22:16) and in another place, “He is led as a sheep to the slaughter;” and, “By the iniquities of my people was He led to death.” (Isa 53:7–8)  

Remig. For because all the Prophets had foretold Christ’s Passion, he does not cite any particular place, but says generally that the prophecies of all the Prophets were being fulfilled.  

Chrys. The disciples who had remained when the Lord was apprehended, fled when He spoke these things to the multitudes, “Then all the disciples forsook him and fled;” for they then understood that He could not escape but rather gave Himself up voluntarily.  

Remig. In this act is shown the Apostles’ frailty; in the first ardour of their faith they had promised to die with Him, but in their fear they forgot their promise and fled. The same we may see in those who undertake to do great things for the love of God, but fail to fulfill what they undertake; they ought not to despair, but to rise again with the Apostles, and recover themselves by penitence.  

Raban. Mystically, As Peter, who by tears washed away the sin of his denial, figures the recovery of those who lapse in time of martyrdom; so the flight of the other disciples suggests the precaution of flight to such as feel themselves unfit to endure torments.  

Aug., de Cons. Ev., iii, 6 “They that had laid hold on Jesus led Him away to Caiaphas the High Priest.” But He was first taken to Annas, father-in-law to Caiaphas, as John relates. And He was taken bound, there being with that multitude a tribune and cohort, as John also records. (John 18:12)  

Jerome But Josephus writes, *(ed. note: “Josephus (Ant. xviii. 3 and 4,) twice mentions this Caiaphas as the successor of Simon the son of Camithes, but we do not find that he purchased the High Priesthood of Herod.” Vallarsi.)* that this Caiaphas had purchased the priesthood of a single year, notwithstanding that Moses, at God’s command, had directed that High Priests should succeed hereditarily, and that in the Priests likewise succession by birth should be followed up. No wonder then that an unrighteous High Priest should judge unrighteously.  

Raban. And the action suits his name; Caiaphas, i.e., ‘contriving,’ or, ‘politic,’ to execute his villainy; or ‘vomiting from his mouth,’ because of his audacity in uttering a lie, and bringing about the murder. They took Jesus thither, that they might do all advisedly; as it follows, “Where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled.”  

Origen Where Caiaphas the High Priest is, there are assembled the Scribes, that is, the men of the letter *(. note: literati)*, who preside over the letter that killeth; and Elders, not in truth, but in the obsolete ancientness of the letter. It follows, “Peter followed Him afar off,” He would neither keep close to Him, nor altogether leave Him, but “followed afar off.”  

Chrys. Great was the zeal of Peter, who fled not when He saw the others fly, but remained, and entered in. For though John also went in, yet he was known to the Chief Priest. He “followed afar off,” because he was about to deny his Lord.  

Remig. For had he kept close to his Lord’s side, he could never have denied Him. This also shows that Peter should follow his Lord’s Passion, that is, imitate it.  

Aug., Quaest. Ev., i, 46 And also that the Church should follow, i.e., imitate, the Lord’s Passion, but with great difference. For the Church suffers for itself, but Christ for the Church.  

Jerome He went in, either out of the attachment of a disciple, or natural curiosity, seeking to know what sentence the High Priest would pass, whether death, or scourging.
