# Lecture 2

3. Then assembled together the Chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace of the High Priest, who was called Caiaphas,  

> 4. And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him.

> 5. But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the people.

> Gloss., non occ. Then the Evangelist lays before us the hidden springs and machinery by which the Lord’s Passion was brought to pass.

Remig. This, “then,” is to be referred to the preceding words, and means before the Feast of the Passover.  

Origen Not true Priests and elders, but Priests and elders of what seemed the people of God, but was indeed the people of Gomorrah; these, not knowing God’s High Priest, laid a plot against Him, not recognizing “the firstborn of the whole creation, (Col 1:15) yea, even against Him that was elder than them all, did they take counsel.  

Chrys. With such ill designs they came to the chief Priest, seeking a sanction whence a prohibition should have issued. There were at that time several Chief Priests, while the Law allowed but of one, whence it was manifest that the dissolution of the Jewish state was having its beginning. For Moses had commanded that there should be one Chief Priest, whose office should be filled up at death; but in process of time it grew to be annual. All those then who had been Chief Priests *(. note: τους απ’ αρχιερεων)* are here called “Chief Priests.”  

Remig. They are condemned both because they were gathered together, and because they were the Chief Priests; for the more the numbers, and the higher the rank and station of those who band together for any villainy, the greater the enormity of what they do, and the heavier the punishment stored up for them. To show the Lord’s innocence and openness, the Evangelist adds, “that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him.”  

Chrys. For what then did they conspire, to seize Him secretly, or put Him to death? For both; but they feared the people, and therefore waited till the feast was over, for “they said, not on the feast-day.” For the Devil would not that Christ should suffer at the Passover, that His Passion might not be notorious. The Chief Priests had no fear in respect of God, namely, that their guilt might be aggravated by the season, but took into account human things only, “Lest there be an uproar among the people.”  

Origen By reason of the parties among the populace, those who favoured and those who hated Christ, those who believed and those who believed not.  

Leo, Serm. 58, 2 This precaution of the Chief Priests arose not from reverence for the festival, but, from care for the success of their plot; they feared an insurrection at that season, not because of the guilt the populace might thereby incur, but because they might rescue Christ.  

Chrys. But their fury set aside their caution, and finding a betrayer, they put Christ to death in the middle of the feast.  

Leo, Serm. 58, 1 We recognise here a providential arrangement whereby the chief men of the Jews, who had often sought occasion of effecting their cruel purposes against Christ, could never yet succeed till the days of the paschal celebration. For it behoved that the things which had long been promised in symbol and mystery should be accomplished in manifest reality, that the typical lamb should be displaced by the true, and one sacrifice embrace the whole catalogue of the varied victims. That shadows should give way to substance, and copies to the presence of the original; victim is commuted for victim, blood is abolished by blood, and the festival of the Law is at once fulfilled and changed.
