# Lecture 4

***14. Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the Chief Priests,***

> 15. And said unto them, “What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?” And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.

> 16. And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.

> Gloss., non. occ. Having described the occasion of his treachery, the Evangelist proceeds to recount the manner of it.

Chrys. “Then,” when, that is, he heard that this Gospel should be preached every where; for that made him afraid, as it was indeed a mark of unspeakable power.  

Aug., de Cons. Ev., ii, 78 The order of the narrative is this. The Lord says, “Ye know that after two days will be the feast of the Passover; . . . then assembled together the Chief Priests and Scribes; . . . then went one of the twelve.” Thus the narrative of what took place at Bethany is inserted by way of digression, respecting an earlier time between that, “Lest there be an uproar,” and, “Then one of the twelve.”  

Origen “Went,” against that one high priest, who was made a Priest for ever, to many high priests, to sell for a price Him who sought to redeem the whole world.  

Raban. “Went,” he says, because he was neither compelled, nor invited, but of his own free will formed the wicked design.  

Chrys. “One of the twelve,” as much as to say, of that first band who are elected for preeminent merit. *(. note: αριστιδην εξειλεγμενων)*  

Gloss, non. occ He adds his distinctive appellation, “Scarioth,” for there was another Judas.  

Remig. So called from the village Scariotha, from which he came.  

Leo, Serm., 60, 4 He did not out of any fear forsake Christ, but through lust of money cast Him off; for in comparison of the love of money all our affections are feeble; the soul athirst for gain fears not to die for a very little; there is no trace of righteousness in that heart in which covetousness has once taken up its abode. The traitor Judas, intoxicated with this bane, in his thirst for lucre was so foolishly hardened, as to sell his Lord and Master.  

Jerome The wretched Judas would fain replace, by the sale of his Master, that loss which he supposed he had incurred by the ointment. And he does not demand any fixed sum, lest his treachery should seem a gainful thing, but as though delivering up a worthless slave, he left it to those who bought, to determine how much they would give.  

Origen The same do all who take any material or worldly things to cast out of their thoughts the Savior and the word of truth which was in them. “And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver,” as many pieces as the Savior had dwelt years in the world. *(ed. note: i.e., Before He began His ministry, as what follows in Origen shows. For though Origen had at one time considered the duration of Our Lord’s ministry not to have exceeded one year and a few months, he had changed that opinion before this commentary on S. Matt. was written. In it he more than once mentions three years as the probable period. vid. Comm. in Matt. Ser., sect 40)*  

Jerome Joseph was not sold as many, following the LXX (septuagint), think for twenty pieces of gold, but as the Hebrew text has for twenty pieces of silver, *(. note: Gen 37:28)* for it could not be that the servant should be more valuable than his Master.  

Aug., Quaest Ev., i, 41 That the Lord was sold for thirty pieces of silver by Judas, denotes the unrighteous Jews, who pursuing things carnal and temporal, which belong to the five bodily senses, refuse to have Christ; and forasmuch as they did this in the sixth age of the world, their receiving five times six as the price of the Lord is thus signified; and because the Lord’s words are silver, but they understood even the Law carnally, they had, as it were, stamped on silver the image of that worldly dominion which they held to when they renounced the Lord.  

Origen The “opportunity” which Judas sought is further explained by Luke, “how he might betray him in the absence of the multitude;” (Luke 22:6) when the populace was not with Him, but He was withdrawn with His disciples. And this he did, delivering Him up after supper, when He was withdrawn to the garden of Gethsemane. And from that time forward, such has been the season sought for by those that would betray the word of God in time of persecution, when the multitude of believers is not around the word of truth.
