# Lecture 8

***39. And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their beads,***

> 40. And saying, “Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.”

> 41. Likewise also the Chief Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and elders, said,

> 42. “He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.

> 43. He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God.

> 44. The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.

> Chrys. Having stripped and crucified Christ, they go yet further, and seeing Him on the cross revile Him.

Jerome “They revile him” because they passed by that way, and would not walk in the true way of the Scriptures. “They wagged their heads,” because they had just before shifted their feet, and stood not upon a rock. The foolish rabble cast the same taunt against Him that the false witnesses had invented, “Aha! thou that destroyest the temple of God and rebuildest it in three days.”  

Remig. “Aha!” is an interjection of taunt and mockery.  

Hilary What forgiveness then for them, when by the resurrection of His body they shall see the temple of God rebuilt within three days?  

Chrys. And as beginning to extenuate His former miracles, they add, “Save thyself; if thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.”  

Chrys., Hom. de Cruc. et Latr. ii He, on the contrary, does not come down from the cross, because He is the Son of God; for He therefore came that He might be crucified for us.  

Jerome Even the Scribes and Pharisees reluctantly confess that “He saved others.” Your own judgment then condemns you, for in that He saved others, He could if He would have saved Himself.  

Pseudo-Chrys. *(ed. note, d: Hom. de Cruce et Latr. in the Latin Chrys. (ed. Paris. 1588.) vol. iii. p. 750)* But attend to this speech of these children of the Devil, how they imitate their father’s speech. The Devil said, “If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down;” (Matt 4:6) and they say now, “If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.”  

Leo, Serm. 55, 2 From what source of error, O Jews, have ye sucked in the poison of such blasphemies? What teacher delivered it to you? What learning moved you to think that the true King of Israel, that the veritable Son of God, would be He who would not suffer Himself to be crucified, and would set free His body from the fastenings of the nails? Not the bidden meaning of the Law, not the mouths of the Prophets. Had ye indeed ever read, “I hid not my face from the shame of spitting;” (Is 50:6) or that again, :They pierced my hands and my feet, they told all my bones.” (Ps 22:16) Where have ye ever read that the Lord came down from the cross? But ye have read, “The Lord hath reigned from the tree.” *(ed. note, e: Ps. 96, 10. ‘Dominus regnavit a ligno,’ in the old Italic Version; and so Tertullian adv. Marc. iii. The Vulg. follows the Heb.)*  

Raban. Had He then been prevailed on by their taunts to leave the cross, He would not have proved to us the power of endurance; but He waited enduring their mockery; and He who would not come down from the cross, rose again from the tomb.  

Jerome But unworthy of credit is that promise, “And we will believe him.” For which is greater, to come down while yet alive from the cross, or to rise from the tomb when dead? Yet this He did, and ye believed not; therefore neither would ye have believed if He had come down from the cross. It seems to me that this was a suggestion of the daemons. For immediately when the Lord was crucified they felt the power of the cross, and perceived that their strength was broken, and therefore contrive this to move Him to come down from the cross. But the Lord, aware of the designs of His foes, remains on the cross that He may destroy the Devil.  

Chrys. “He trusted in God, let him now deliver him, if he will.” O most foul! Were they therefore not Prophets or righteous men, because God did not deliver them out of their perils? But if He would not oppose their glory, which accrued to them out of the perils which you brought upon them, much more in this man ought you not to be offended because of what He suffers; what He has ever said ought to remove any such suspicion. When they add, “Because he said, I am the Son of God,” they desire to intimate that He suffered as an impostor and seducer, and as making high and false pretences. And not only the Jews and the soldiers from below, but from above likewise. “The thieves, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.”  

Aug., de Cons. Ev., iii, 16 It may seem that Luke contradicts this, when be describes one of the robbers as reviling Him, and as therefore rebuked by the other. But we may suppose that Matthew, shortly alluding to the circumstance, has used the plural for the singular, as in the Epistle to the Hebrews we have, “Have stopped the mouths of lions,” (Heb. 11:33) when Daniel only is spoken of. And what more common way of speaking than for one to say, See the country people insult me, when it is one only who has done so. If indeed Matthew had said that both the thieves had reviled the Lord, there would be some discrepancy; but when he says merely, “The thieves,” without adding ‘both,’ we must consider it as that common form of speech in which the singular is signified by the plural.  

Jerome Or it may be said that at first both reviled Him; but when the sun had withdrawn, the earth was shaken, the rocks were rent, and the darkness increased, one believed on Jesus, and repaired his former denial by a subsequent confession.  

Chrys. At first both reviled Him, but afterwards not so. For that you should not suppose that the thing was arranged by any collusion, and that the thief was not a thief, he shows you by his wanton reproaches, that even after He was crucified he was a thief and a foe, but was afterwards totally changed.  

Hilary That both the thieves cast in His teeth the manner of His Passion, shows that the cross should be an offense to all mankind, even to the faithful.  

Jerome Or, in the two thieves both nations, Jews and Gentiles, at first blasphemed the Lord; afterwards the latter terrified by the multitude of signs did penitence, and thus rebukes the Jews, who blaspheme to this day.  

Origen The thief who was saved may be a sign of those who after many sins have believed on Christ.
