# Lecture 2

6. And the Chief Priests took the silver pieces, and said, “It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.”  

> 7. And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter’s field, to bury strangers in.

> 8. Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this day.

> 9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremias the prophet, saying, “And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value;

> 10. And gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me.”

> Chrys. The Chief Priests knowing that they had purchased a murder were condemned by their own conscience; they said, “It is the price of blood.”

Jerome Truly straining out the gnat, and swallowing the camel; for if they would not put the money into the treasury, because it was the price of blood, why did they shed the blood at all?  

Origen They thought it meet to spend upon the dead that money which was the price of blood. But as there are differences even in burial places, they used the price of Jesus’ blood in the purchase of some potter’s field, where foreigners might be buried, not as they desired in the sepulchres of their fathers.  

Aug., App. Serm., 80, 1 It was brought about, I conceive, by God’s providence, that the Savior’s price should not minister means of excess to sinners, but repose to foreigners, that thence Christ might both redeem the living by the shedding of His blood, and harbour the dead by the price of His passion. Therefore with the price of the Lord’s blood the potter’s field is purchased. We read in Scripture that the salvation of the whole human race has been purchased by the Savior’s blood. This field then is the whole world. The potter who is the Lord of the soil, is He who has formed of clay the vessels of our bodies. This potter’s field then was purchased by Christ’s blood, and to strangers who without country or home wander over the whole world, repose is provided by Christ’s blood. These foreigners are the more devout Christians, who have renounced the world, and have no possession in it, and so repose in Christ’s blood; for the burial of Christ is nothing but the repose of a Christian; for as the Apostle says, “We are buried with him by baptism into death.” (Rom 6:4) We are in this life then as foreigners.  

Jerome Also we, who were strangers to the Law and the Prophets, have profited by the perverse temper of the Jews to obtain salvation for ourselves.  

Origen Or, the “foreigners” are they who to the end are aliens from God, for the righteous are buried with Christ in a new tomb hewn out in the rock. But they who are aliens from God, even to the end, are buried in the field of a potter, a worker in clay, which being bought by the price of blood, is called the field of blood.  

Gloss, non occ. “To this day” means to the time when the Evangelist was then writing. He then confirms the event by the testimony of the Prophet; “Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet,” &c.  

Jerome This is not found at all in Jeremiah; but in Zacharias *(Note: Zech 11:13)*, who is the last but one of the twelve Prophets, something like it is told, and though the sense is not very different, yet the arrangement and the words are different.  

Aug., de Cons. Ev., iii, 7 But if any one thinks this lowers the historian’s credit, first let him know that not all the copies of the Gospels have the name Jeremiah, but some simply “by the Prophet.” But I do not like this defense, because the more, and the more ancient, copies have Jeremiah, and there could be no reason for adding the name, and thus making an error. But its erasure is well accounted for by the hardihood of ignorance having heard the foregoing objection urged. It might be then, that the name Jeremiah occurred to the mind of Matthew as he wrote, instead of the name Zacharias, as so often happens; and that he would have straightway corrected it, when pointed out to him by such as read this while he yet lived in the flesh, had he not thought that his memory, being guided by the Holy Spirit, would not thus have called up to him one name instead of another, had not the Lord determined that it should thus be written. And why He should have so determined, the first reason is, that it would convey the wonderful consent of the Prophets, who all spake by one Spirit, which is much greater than if all the words of all the Prophets had been uttered through the mouth of one man; so that we receive without doubt whatever the Holy Spirit spake through them, each word belongs to all in common, and the whole is the utterance of each. Suppose it to happen at this day, that in repeating another’s words one should mention not the speaker’s name, but that of some other person, who however was the other’s greater friend, and then immediately recollecting himself should correct himself, he might yet add, Yet am I right, if you only think of the close unanimity that exists between the two. How much more is this to be observed of the holy Prophets! There is a second reason why the name Jeremiah should be suffered to remain in this quotation from Zacharias, or rather why it should have been suggested by the Holy Spirit. It is said in Jeremiah, that he bought a field of his brother’s son, and gave him silver for it, (Jer 32:9) though not indeed the sum stated in Zacharias, thirty pieces of silver. That the Evangelist has here adapted the thirty pieces of silver in Zacharias to this transaction in the Lord’s history, is plain; but he may also wish to convey that what Jeremiah speaks of the field is mystically alluded to here, and therefore he puts not the name of Zacharias who spoke of the thirty pieces of silver, but of Jeremiah who spoke of the purchase of the field. So that in reading the Gospel and finding the name of Jeremiah, but not finding there the passage respecting the thirty pieces of silver, but the account of the purchase of the field, the reader might be induced to compare the two together, and so extract from them the sense of the prophecy, how far it refers to what was now accomplished in the Lord. For what Matthew adds to the prophecy, *Whom they of the children of Israel did value, and gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me*, this, *as the Lord appointed me*, is found neither in Zacharias nor Jeremiah. It must then be taken in the person of the Evangelist as inserted with a mystic meaning, that he had learned by revelation that the prophecy referred to this matter of the price for which Christ was betrayed.  

Jerome, Hieron. ad Pam. Ep. 57, 5 Far be it then from a follower of Christ to suppose him guilty of falsehood, whereas his business was not to pry into words and syllables, but to lay down the staple of doctrine.  

Aug., Hieron. in loc. I have lately read in a Hebrew book given me by a Hebrew of the Nazarene sect, an apocryphal Jeremiah, in which I find the very words here quoted. After all, I am rather inclined to think that the passage was taken by Matthew out of Zacharias, in the usual manner of the Apostles and Evangelists when they quote from the Old Testament, neglecting the words, and attending only to the sense.
