# Lecture 4

***^1:6^ David the king begot Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias.***

> ^1:7^ And Solomon begot Roboam; and Roboam begot Abia; and Abia begot Asa.

> The Evangelist has now finished the first fourteen generations, and is come to the second, which consists of royal personages, and therefore he begins with David, who was the first king in the tribe of Judah, saying, ***David the king begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias***.

Aug., de Cons. Evan., ii, 4 Since in Matthew’s genealogy is showed forth the taking on him by Christ of our sins, therefore he descends from David to Solomon, in whose mother David had sinned. Luke ascends to David through Nathan, for through the prophet God punished David’s sin; because Luke’s genealogy is to show the putting away of our sins.  

Aug., Lib. Retract., ii, 16 That is, it must be said, through a prophet of the same name, for it was not Nathan the son of David who reproved him, but a prophet of the same name.  

Remig. Let us enquire why Matthew does not mention Bathsheba by name as he does the other women. Because the others, though deserving of much blame, were yet commendable for many virtues. But Bathsheba was not only consenting in the adultery, but in the murder of her husband, hence her name is not introduced in the Lord’s genealogy.  

Gloss Besides, he does not name Bathsheba, that, by naming Urias, he may recall to memory that great wickedness which she was guilty of towards him.  

Ambrose But the holy David is the more excellent in this, that he confessed himself to be but man, and neglected not to wash out with the tears of repentance the sin of which he had been guilty, in so taking away Urias’ wife. Herein showing us that none ought to trust in his own strength, for we have a mighty adversary whom we cannot overcome without God’s aid. And you will commonly observe very heavy sins befalling to the share of illustrious men, that they may not from their other excellent virtues be thought more than men, but that you may see that as men they yield to temptation.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Solomon is interpreted, ‘peace-maker,’ because having subdued all the nations round about, and made them tributary, he had a peaceful reign. Roboam in interpreted, ‘by a multitude of people,’ for multitude is the mother of sedition; for where many are joined in a crime, that is commonly unpunishable. But a limit in numbers is the mistress of good order.
