# Lecture 5

***^1:8^ And Asa begot Josaphat. And Josaphat begot Joram. And Joram begot Ozias.***

> ^1:9^ And Ozias begot Joatham; and Joatham begot Achaz; and Achaz begot Ezekias.

> ^1:10^ And Ezekias begot Manasses; and Manasses begot Amon; and Amon begot Josias.

> ^1:11^ And Josias begot Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon.

> Jerome In the fourth book of Kings we read, that Ochozias was the son of Joram. On his death, Josabeth, sister of Ochozias and daughter of Joram, took Joash, her brother’s son, and preserved him from the slaughter of the royal seed by Athalias. To Joash succeeded his son Amasias; after him his son Azarias, who is called Ozias; after him his son Joatham. Thus you see according to historical truth there were three intervening kings, who are omitted by the Evangelist. Joram, moveover, begot not Ozias, but Ochozias, and the rest as we have related. But because it was the purpose of the Evangelist to make each of the three periods consist of fourteen generations, and because Joram had connected himself with Jezebel’s most impious race, therefore his posterity to the third generation is omitted in tracing the lineage of the holy birth.

Hilary Thus the stain of the Gentile alliance being purged, the royal race is again taken up in the fourth following generation.  

Pseudo-Chrys. What the Holy Spirit testified through the prophet, saying that he would cut off every male from the house of Ahab, and Jezebel, that Jehu the son of Nausi fulfilled, and received the promise that his children to the fourth generation should sit on the throne of Israel. As great a blessing then as was given upon the house of Ahab, so great a curse was given on the house of Joram, because of the wicked daughter of Ahab and Jazebel, that his sons to the fourth generation should be cut out of the number of the Kings. Thus his sin descended on his posterity as it had been written, *I will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation* (Ex 20:5). Thus see how dangerous it is to marry with the seed of the ungodly.  

Aug., Hilsr. Amast. V. et N. Test. q. 85 Or, Ochozias, Joash, and Amasias, were excluded from the number, because their wickedness was continuous and without interval. For Solomon was suffered to hold the kingdom for his father’s deserts, Roboam for his son’s. But these three doing evil successively were excluded. This then is an example how a race is cut off when wickedness is shown therein in perpetual succession.  

There follows, ***And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias***.  

Gloss This Ezekias was he to whom, when he had no children, it was said, *Set thy house in order, for thou shalt die* (Isa 38:1). He wept, not from desire of longer life, for he knew that Solomon had thereby pleased God, that he had not asked length of days; but he wept, for he feared that God’s promise should not be fulfilled, when himself, being in the line of David of whom Christ should come, was without children.  

There follows, ***And Ezekias begat Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias.*** ***And Josias begot Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon***.  

Pseudo-Chrys. But the order in the book of Kings is different, *(2 Kings 23.)* thus namely; Josias begot Eliakim, afterwards called Joakim; Joakim begot Jechonias. But Joakim is not reckoned among the kings in the genealogy, because God’s people had not set him on the throne, but Pharoah by his might. For if it were just that only for their intermixture with the race of Ahab, three kings should be shut out of the number in the genealogy, was it not just that Joakim should be likewise shut out, whom Pharaoh had set up as king by hostile force? And thus Jechonias, who is the son of Joakim, and the grandson of Josiah, is reckoned among the kings as the son of Josiah, in place of his father who is omitted.  

Jerome Otherwise, we may consider the first Jeconias to be the same as Joakim, and the second to be the son not the father, the one being spelt with k and m, the second by ch and n. This distinction has been confounded both by Greeks and Latins, by the fault of writers and the lapse of time.  

Ambrose, in Luc., cap. 2 That there were two kings of the name of Joakim, is clear from the book of Kings, for it is written thus: *And Joakim slept with his fathers, and Joachim his son reigned in his stead* (2 Kings 24:6) This son is the same whom Jeremiah calls Jeconias. And rightly did St. Matthew purpose to differ from the prophet, because he sought to show therein the great abundance of the Lord’s mercies. For the Lord did not seek among men nobility of race, but suitably chose to be born of captives and of sinners, as he came to preach remission of sin to the captives. The Evangelist therefore did not conceal either of these; but rather showed them both, inasmuch as both were called Jeconias.  

Remig. But it may be asked, why the Evangelist says they were born in the carrying away, when they were born before the carrying away. He says this because they were born for this purpose, that they should be led captive, from the dominion of the whole nation, for their own and others’ sins. And because God foreknew that they were to be carried away captive, therefore he says, they were born in the carrying away to Babylon. But of those whom the holy Evangelist places together in the Lord’s genealogy, it should be known, that they were alike in good or ill fame. Judah and his brethren were notable for good, in like manner Phares and Zara, Jechonias and his brethren, were notable for evil.  

Gloss Mystically, David is Christ, who overcame Golias, that is, the devil. Urias, i.e., God is my light, is the devil who says, *I will be like the Highest* (Isa 14:14). To him the Church was married, when Christ on the throne of the majesty of his Father loved her, and having made her beautiful, united her to himself in wedlock. Or Urias is the Jewish nation who through the law boasted of their light. From them Christ took away the law, having taught it to speak of himself. Bersabee is ‘the well of satiety,’ that is, the abundance of spiritual grace.  

Remig. Bersabee is interpreted, ‘the seventh well,’ or, ‘the well of the oath’, *(ed. note, c: באר שבע the well of the oath, the origin of the name is given, Gen 21:28–31. “satiety” as if from שבע)* by which is signified the grant of baptism, in which is given the gift of the sevenfold Spirit, and the oath against the devil is made. Christ is also Solomon, i.e., the peaceful, according to that of the Apostle, *He is our peace* (Eph 2:14). Roboam *(ed. note, d: So Jerome, from רחב; or the foolishness of the people, Ecclus. 47. 23)* is, ‘the breadth of the people,’ according to that, *Many shall come from the East and from the West* (Matt 8:11).  

Raban. Or; ‘the might of the people,’ because he quickly converts the people to the faith.  

Remig. He is also Abias, that is, ‘the Lord Father,’ according to that, *One is your Father who is in heaven* (Matt 23:9). And again, *Ye call me Master and Lord* (John 13:13). He is also Asa, *(ed. note, e: So Jerome; as if from נשה=נסה; but אסא means a physician)* that is, ‘lifting up,’ according to that, *Who taketh away the sins of the world* (John 1:29). He is also Josaphat, that is, ‘judging,’ for, *The Father hath committed all judgment unto the Son* (John 5:22). He is also Joram, that is, ‘lofty,’ according to that, *No man hath ascended up to heaven, but He that came down from heaven* (John 3:13). He is also Ozias, that is, ‘the Lord’s strength,’ for *The Lord is my strength and my praise* (Ps 118:14). He is also Jotham, *(ed. note, f: And so Jerome, from תמם)* that is, ‘completed,’ or ‘perfected,’ for *Christ is the end of the law* (Rom 10:4). He is also Ahaz, *(ed. note, g: אחז to seize or hold, and so Jerome.)* that is, ‘turning,’ according to that, *Be ye turned to Me* (Zech 1:3).  

Raban. Or, ‘embracing,’ because, *None knoweth the Father but the Son* (Matt 11:27)  

Remig. He is also Ezekias, that is, ‘the strong Lord,’ or, ‘the Lord shall comfort;’ according to that, “Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.” (John 16:33) He is also Manasses, that is, ‘forgetful,’ or, ‘forgotten,’ according to that, “I will not remember your sins any more.” (Ezek 28) He is also Aaron, *(ed note, h: A strong mountain; Jerome. It has no Hebrew root.)* that is, ‘faithful,’ according to that, “The Lord is faithful in all His words.” (Ps 145:17) He is also Josias, that is, ‘the incense of the Lord,’, *(ed. note, i: A sacrifice to the Lord,—Jerome; from אשה fire in the ritual service, or incense, Lev 24:7)* as, “And being in an agony, He prayed more earnestly.” (Luke 22:44)  

Raban. And that incense signifies prayer, the Psalmist witnesses, saying, “Let my prayer come up as incense before Thee.” (Ps 141:2) Or, ‘The salvation of the Lord,’ according to that, “My salvation is for ever.” (Isa 55)  

Remig. He is Jechonias, *(ed. note, k: יכניהו “the Lord establisheth,” also “prepareth.”)* that is, ‘preparing,’ or ‘the Lord’s preparation,’ according to that, “If I shall depart, I will also prepare a place for you.” (John 14:3)  

Gloss Morally; After David follows Solomon, which is interpreted, ‘peaceful.’ For one then becomes peaceful, when unlawful motions being composed, and being as it were already set in the everlasting rest, he serves God, and turns others to Him. Then follows Roboam, that is, ‘the breadth of the people.’ For when there is no longer any thing to overcome within himself, it behoves a man to look abroad to others, and to draw with him the people of God to heavenly things. Next is Abias, that is, ‘the Lord Father,’ for these things premised, He may proclaim Himself the Son of God, and then He will be Asa, that is, ‘raising up,’ and will ascend to His Father from virtue to virtue: and He will become Josaphat, that is, ‘judging,’ for He will judge others, and will be judged of none. Thus he becomes Joram, that is, ‘lofty,’ as it were dwelling on high; and is made Oziah, that is, ‘the strong One of the Lord,’ as attributing all his strength to God, and persevering in his path. Then follows Jotham, that is, ‘perfect,’ for he groweth daily for greater perfection. And thus he becomes Ahaz, that is, ‘embracing,’ for by obedience knowledge is increased according to that, “They have proclaimed the worship of the Lord, and have understood His doings.” Then follows Ezekias, that is, ‘the Lord is strong,’ because he understands that God is strong, and so turning to His love, he becomes Manassas, ‘forgetful,’ because he gives up as forgotten all worldly things; and is made thereby Amon, that is, ‘faithful,’ for whoso despises all temporal things, defrauds no man of his goods. Thus he is made Josias, that is, ‘in certain hope of the Lord’s salvation;’ for Josias in intepreted ‘the salvation of the Lord.’
