# Lecture 6

***13. Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him.***

> 14. But John forbad Him, saying, “I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?”

> 15. And Jesus answering said unto him, “Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he suffered Him.

> Gloss., non occ. Christ having been proclaimed to the world by the preaching of His forerunner, now after long obscurity will manifest Himself to men.

Remig. In this verse is contained person, place, time, and office. Time, in the word, “Then.”  

Rabanus That is, when He was thirty years old, showing that none should be ordained priest, or even to preach till He be of full age. Joseph at thirty years was made governor of Egypt; David began to reign, and Ezekiel his prophesying at the same age.  

Chrys., Hom. 10, 1 Because after his baptism Christ was to put an end to the Law, He therefore came to be baptized at this age, that having so kept the Law, it might not be said that He cancelled it, because He could not observe it.  

Pseudo-Chrys. “Then,” that is when John preached, that He might confirm his preaching, and Himself receive his witness. But as when the morning-star has risen, the sun does not wait for that star to set, but rising as it goes forward, gradually obscures its brightness; so Christ waited not for John to finish his course, but appeared while he yet taught.  

Remig. The Persons are described in the words, “came Jesus to John;” that is, God to man, the Lord to His servant, the King to His soldier, the Light to the lamp. The Place, “from Galilee to Jordan.” Galilee means ‘transmigration.’ Whoso then will be baptized, must pass from vice to virtue, and humble himself in coming to baptism, for Jordan means, ‘descent.’  

Ambrose, Ambrosiaster. Serm. x. 5 Scripture tells of many wonders wrought at various times in this river; as that, among others, in the Psalms, “Jordan was driven backwards;” (Ps 114:3) before the water was driven back, now sins are turned back in its current; as Elijah divided the waters of old, so Christ the Lord wrought in the same Jordan the separation of sin.  

Remig. The office to be performed; “that He might be baptized of him;”  

not baptism to the remission of sins, but to leave the water sanctified for those after to be baptized.  

Aug., non occ., cf. Ambrosiaster, Serm. 12. 4 The Savior willed to be baptized not that He might Himself be cleansed, but to cleanse the water for us. *(ed. note: This is the doctrine of S. Austin, in Joan. iv. 14. Op. Imp. contr. Julian iv. 63. Ambros. in Luke ii, 83, &c. &c. vid. Pusey on Baptism, p. 279. ed. 2)* From the time that Himself was dipped in the water, from that time has He washed away all our sins in water. And let none wonder that water, itself corporeal substance, is said to be effectual to the purification of the soul; it is so effectual, reaching to and searching out the hidden recesses of the conscience. Subtle and penetrating in its own nature, made yet more so by Christ’s blessing, it touches the hidden springs of life, the secret places of the soul, by virtue of its all-pervading dew. The course of blessing is even yet more penetrating than the flow of waters. Thus the blessing which like a spiritual river flows on from the Savior’s baptism, hath filled the basins of all pools, and the courses of all fountains.  

Pseudo-Chrys. He comes to baptism, that He who has taken upon Him human nature, may be found to have fulfilled the whole mystery of that nature; not that He is Himself a sinner, but He has taken on Him a nature that is sinful. And therefore though He needed not baptism Himself, yet the carnal nature in others needed it.  

Ambrose, Ambrosiaster, Serm. 12. 1 Also like a wise master inculcating His doctrines as much by His own practice, as by word of mouth, He did that which He commanded all His disciples to do.  

Aug., in Joann. Tract. v. 2 He deigned to be baptized of John that the servants might see with what readiness they ought to run to the baptism of the Lord, when He did not refuse to be baptized of His servant.  

Jerome Also that by being Himself baptized, He might sanction the baptism of John.  

Chrys., Hom. 12 But since John’s baptism was to repentance, and therefore showed the presence of sin, that none might suppose Christ’s coming to the Jordan to have been on this account, John cried to Him, “I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?” As if he had said,  

Pseudo-Chrys. That Thou shouldest baptize me there is good cause, that I may be made righteous and worthy of heaven; but that I should baptize Thee, what cause is there? Every good gift comes down from heaven upon earth, not ascends from earth to heaven.  

Hilary John reject Him from baptism as God; He teaches him, that it ought to be performed on Him as man.  

Jerome Beautifully said is that “now,” to show that as Christ was baptized with water by John, so John must be baptized by Christ with the Spirit. Or, suffer now that I who have taken the form of a servant should fulfill all that low estate; otherwise know that in the day of judgment thou must be baptized with my baptism. Or, the Lord says, ‘Suffer this now; I have also another baptism wherewithal I must be baptized; thou baptizest Me with water, that I may baptize thee for Me with thy own blood.’  

Pseudo-Chrys. In this he shows that Christ after this baptized John; which is expressly told in some apocryphal books. *(ed. note: Apocryphis ap. Aquin. in secretioribus libris, in the present text of Pseudo-Chrysost. The same opinion is imputed to S. Gregory Naz. S. Austin, &c. but apparently without reason, vid. Tillemont Memoirs St. Joan. B. note 7. It was an objection familiar with the heretics whether the Apostles were baptized, vid. Tertull. in Bapt. 12)* Suffer now that I fulfill the righteousness of baptism in deed, and not only in word; first submitting to it, and then preaching it; for “so it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.” Not that by being baptized He fulfils all righteousness, but “so,” in the same manner, that is, as He first fulfilled the righteousness of baptism by His deeds, and after preached it, so He might all other righteousness, according to that of the Acts, “All things that Jesus began both to do and to teach.” (Acts 1:1) Or thus, “all righteousness,” according to the ordinance of human nature; as He had before fulfilled the righteousness of birth, growth, and the like.  

Hilary For by Him must all righteousness have been fulfilled, by whom alone the Law could be fulfilled.  

Jerome “Righteousness;” but he adds neither ‘of the Law;’ nor ‘of nature,’ that we may understand it of both.  

Remig. Or thus; “It becometh us to fulfill all righteousness,” that is, to give an example of perfect justification in baptism, without which the gate of the kingdom of heaven is not opened. Hence let the proud take an example of humility, and not scorn to be baptized by My humble members when they see Me baptized by John My servant. That is true humility which obedience accompanies; as it continues, “then he suffered Him,” that is, at last consented to baptize Him.
