# Lecture 6

***8. “Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God.”***

> Ambrose, in Luc., vi, 22 The merciful loses the benefit of his mercy, unless he shows it from a pure heart; for if he seeks to have whereof to boast, he loses the fruit of his deeds; the next that follows therefore is, “Blessed are the pure of heart.”

Gloss. ap. Anselm Purity of heart comes properly in the sixth place, because on the sixth day man was created in the image of God, which image was shrouded by sin, but is formed anew in pure hearts by grace. It follows rightly the beforementioned graces, because if they be not there, a clean heart is not created in a man.  

Chrys. By the pure are here meant those who possess a perfect goodness, conscious to themselves of no evil thoughts, or again those who live in such temperance as is mostly necessary to seeing God according to that of St. Paul, “Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God.” For as there are many merciful, yet unchaste, to show that mercy alone is not enough, he adds this concerning purity.  

Jerome The pure is known by purity of heart, for the temple of God cannot be impure; and this is what is said: *for they shall see God*.  

Pseudo-Chrys. He who in thought and deed fulfils all justice *sees God* in his heart, for justice is an image of God, for God is justice. So far as any one has rescued himself from evil, and works things that are good, so far does he *see God*, either hardly, or fully, or sometimes, or always, according to the capabilities of human nature. But in that world to come the pure in heart shall see God face to face, not in a glass, and in enigma as here.  

Aug., Serm. in Mont., i, 2 They are foolish who seek to see God with the bodily eye, seeing He is seen only by the heart, as it is elsewhere written, “In singleness of heart seek ye Him;” the single heart is the same as is here called the pure heart.  

Aug., City of God, book 22, ch. 29 But if spiritual eyes in the spiritual body shall be able only to see so much as they we now have can see, undoubtedly God will not be able to be seen of them.  

Aug., de Trin., i, 8 This seeing God is the reward of faith; to which end our hearts are made pure by faith, as it is written, “cleansing their hearts by faith;” (Acts 15:9) but the present verse proves this still more strongly.  

Aug., de Genesi ad Literam. xii. 26 No one seeing God can be alive with the life men have on earth, or with these our bodily senses. Unless one die altogether out of this life, either by totally departing from the body, or so alienated from carnal lusts that he may truly say with the Apostle, “whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell,” he is not translated that he should see this vision.  

Gloss. non occ. The reward of these is greater than the reward of the first; being not merely to dine in the King’s court, but further to see His face.
