# Lecture 3

9. “After this manner therefore pray ye Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed by thy name.”  

> Gloss Amongst His other saving instructions and divine lessons, wherewith He counsels believers, He has set forth for us a form of prayer in few words; thus giving us confidence that will be quickly granted, for which He would have us pray so shortly.

Cyprian, Tr. vii, 1 He who gave to us to live, taught us also to pray, to the end, that speaking to the Father in the prayer which the Son hath taught, we may receive a readier hearing. It is praying like friends and familiars to offer up to God of His own. Let the Father recognize the Son’s words when we offer up our prayer; and seeing we have Him when we sin for an Advocate with the Father, let us put forward the words of our Advocate, when as sinners we make petition for our offences.  

Gloss. ord. Yet we do not confine ourselves wholly to these words, but use others also conceived in the same sense, with which our heart is kindled.  

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 4 Since in every entreaty we have first to propitiate the good favour of Him whom we entreat, and after that mention what we entreat for; and this we commonly do by saying something in praise of Him whom we entreat, and place it in the front of our petition; in this the Lord bids us say no more than only, “Our Father which art in Heaven.” Mary things were said of them to the praise of God, yet do we never find it taught to the children of Israel to address God as ‘Our Father;’ He is rather set before them as a Lord over slaves. But of Christ’s people the Apostle says, “We have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father,” (Rom 8:15) and that not of our deservings, but of grace. This then we express in the prayer when we say, “Father;” which name also stirs up love. For what can be dearer than sons are to a father? And a suppliant spirit, in that men should say to God “Our Father.” And a certain presumption that we shall obtain; for what will He not give to His sons when they ask of Him, who has given them that first that they should be sons? Lastly, how great anxiety possesses his mind, that having called God his Father, he should not be unworthy of such a Father. By this the rich and the noble are admonished when they have become Christians not to be haughty towards the poor or truly born, who like themselves may address God as “Our Father;” and they therefore cannot truly or piously say this unless they acknowledge such for brethren.  

Chrys. For what hurt does such kindred with those beneath us, when we are all alike kin to One above us? For who calls God Father, in that one title confesses at once the forgiveness of sins, the adoption, the heirship, the brotherhood, which he has with the Only-begotten, and the gift of the Spirit. For none can call God Father, but he who has obtained all these blessings. In a two-fold manner, therefore, he moves the feeling of them that pray, both by the dignity of Him who is prayed to, and the greatness of those benefits which we gain by prayer.  

Cyprian, Tr. vii. 4 We say not My Father, but “Our Father,” for the teacher of peace and master of unity would not have men pray singly and severally, since when any prays, he is not to pray for himself only. Our prayer is general and for all, and when we pray, we pray not for one person, but for us all, because we all are one. So also He willed that one should pray for all, according as Himself in one did bear us all.  

Pseudo-Chrys. To pray for ourselves it is our necessity compels us, to pray for others brotherly charity instigates.  

Gloss. ord. Also because He is a common Father of all, we say, “Our Father;” not “My Father” which is appropriate to Christ alone, who is his Son by nature.  

Pseudo-Chrys. “Which are in heaven,” is added, that we may know that we have a heavenly Father, and may blush to immerse ourselves wholly in earthly things when we have a Father in heaven.  

Cassian, Collat. ix. 18 And that we should speed with strong desire thitherward where our Father dwells.  

Chrys. “In heaven,” not confining God’s presence to that, but withdrawing the thoughts of the petitioner from earth and fixing them on things above.  

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 5 Or; “in heaven” is among the saints and the righteous men; for God is not contained in space. For the heavens literally are the upper parts of the universe, and if God be thought to be in them, then are the birds of more desert than men, seeing they must have their habitation nearer to God. But, “God is nigh,” (Ps. 34:18) it is not said to the men of lofty stature, or to the inhabitants of the mountain tops; but, “to the broken in heart.” But as the sinner is called ‘earth,’ as “earth thou art, and unto earth thou must return,” (Gen 3:19) so might the righteous on the other hand be called ‘the heaven.’ Thus then it would be rightly said “Who art in heaven,” for there would seem to be as much difference spiritually between the righteous and sinners, as locally, between heaven and earth. With the intent of signifying which thing it is, that we turn our faces in prayer to the east, not as though God was there only, deserting all other parts of the earth; but that the mind may be reminded to turn itself to that nature which is more excellent, that is to God, when his body, which is of earth, is turned to the more excellent body which is of heaven. For it is desirable that all, both small and great, should have right conceptions of God, and therefore for such as cannot fix their thought on spiritual natures, it is better that they should think of God as being in heaven than in earth.
