# Lecture 7

***11. “Give us this day our daily bread.”***

Aug., Enchir., 115 These three things therefore which have been asked in the foregoing petitions, are begun here on earth, and according to our proficiency are increased in us; but in another life, as we hope, they shall be everlastingly possessed in perfection. In the four remaining petitions we ask for temporal blessings which are necessary to obtaining the eternal; the bread, which is accordingly the next petition in order, is a necessary.  

Jerome The Greek word here which we render, ‘supersubstantialis,’ is επιουσιος. The LXX often make use of the word, περιουσιος, by which we find, on reference to the Hebrew, they always render the word, sogola. *(ed. note, c: סגלה on επιουσιος, vid. note c on Cyr. Cat. xxiii. 15. Tr. and Petav. Dogm. t. iv. pp. 200,201. ed. Antwerp. 1700.)* Symmachus translates it εξαιρετος, that is, ‘chief,’ or ‘excellent,’ though in one place he has interpreted ‘peculiar.’ When then we pray God to give us our ‘peculiar’ or ‘chief’ bread, we mean Him who says in the Gospel, “I am the living bread which came down from heaven.” (John 6:51)  

Cyprian For Christ is the bread of life, and this bread belongs not to all men, but to us. This bread we pray that it be given day by day, lest we who are in Christ, and who daily receive the Eucharist for food of salvation, should by the admission of any grievous crime, and our being therefore forbidden the heavenly bread, be separated from the body of Christ. Hence then we pray, that we who abide in Christ, may not draw back from His sanctification and His body.  

Aug., De Don. Pers. 4 Here then the saints ask for perseverance of God, when they pray that they may not be separated from the body of Christ, but may abide in that holiness, committing no crime.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Or by ‘supersubstantialis’ may be intended, ‘daily.’ *(ed. note: Pseudo-Chrys. reads or translates ‘quotidianus,’ he does not introduce the word ‘supersubstantialis’ at all.)*  

Cassian, Coll., ix, 21 In that He says, “this day,” He shows that it is to be daily taken, and that this prayer should be offered at all seasons, seeing there is no day on which we have not need, by the receiving of this bread, to confirm the heart of the inward man.  

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 7 There is here a difficulty created by the circumstance of there being many in the East, who do not daily communicate in the Lord’s Supper. And they defend their practice on the ground of ecclesiastical authority, that they do this without offense, and are not forbidden by those who preside over the Churches, But not to pronounce any thing concerning them in either way, this ought certainly to occur to our thoughts, that we have here received of the Lord a rule for prayer which we ought not to transgress. Who then will dare to affirm that we ought to use this prayer only once? Or if twice or thrice, yet only up to that hour at which we communicate on the Lord’s body? For after that we cannot say, “Give us this day,” that which we have already received. Or will any one on this account be able to compel us to celebrate this sacrament at the close of the day?  

Cassian Though the expression today may be understood of this present life; thus, Give us this bread while we abide in this world.  

Jerome We may also interpret the word ‘supersubstantialis’ otherwise, as that which is above all other substances, and more excellent than all creatures, to wit, the body of the Lord.  

Aug. Or by “daily” we may understand spiritual, namely, the divine precepts which we ought to meditate and work.  

Greg., Mor., xxiv. 7 We call it our bread, yet pray that it may be given us, for it is God’s to give, and is made ours by our receiving it.  

Jerome Others understand it literally according to that saying of the Apostle, “Having food and raiment, let us therewith be content,” that the saints should have care only of present food; as it follows, “Take no thought for the morrow.”  

Aug., Epist., 130, 11 So that herein we ask for a sufficiency of all things necessary under the one name of bread.  

Pseudo-Chrys. We pray, “Give us this day our daily bread,” not only that we may have what to eat, which is common to both righteous and sinners; but that what we eat we may receive at the hand of God, which belongs only to the saints. For to him God giveth bread who earns it by righteous means; but to him who earns it by sin, the Devil it is that gives. Or that inasmuch as it is given by God, it is received sanctified; and therefore He adds, “our,” that is, such bread as we have prepared for us, that do Thou give us, that by Thy giving it may be sanctified. Like as the Priest taking bread of the laic, sanctifies it, and then offers it to him; the bread indeed is his that brought it in offering, but that it is sanctified is the benefit from the Priest. He says “Our” for two reasons. First, because all things that God gives us He gives through us to others, that of what we receive of Him we may impart to the helpless. Whoso then of what he gains by his own toil bestows nothing on others, eats not his own bread only, but others’ bread also. Second, he who eats bread got righteously, eats his own bread; but he who eats bread got with sin, eats others’ bread.  

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 7 Some one may perhaps find a difficulty in our here praying that we may obtain necessaries of this life, such as food and raiment, when the Lord has instructed us, “Be not ye careful what ye shall eat, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed.” But it is impossible not to be careful about that for the obtaining which we pray.  

Aug., Epist., 130, 6 But to wish for the necessaries of life and no more, is not improper; for such sufficiency is not sought for its own sake, but for the health of the body, and for such garb and appliances of the person, as may make us to be not disagreeable to those with whom we have to live in all good reputation. For these things we may pray that they may be had when we are in want of them, that they may be kept when we have them.  

Chrys. It should be thought upon how when He had delivered to us this petition, “Thy will be done as in heaven so in earth,” then because He spake to men in the flesh, and not like angelic natures without passion or appetite, He now descends to the needs of our bodies. And He teaches us to pray not for money or the gratification of lust, but for daily bread; and as yet further restriction, He adds, “this day,” that we should not trouble ourselves with thought for the coming day.  

Pseudo-Chrys. And these words at first sight might seem to forbid our having it prepared for the morrow, or after the morrow. If this were so, this prayer could only suit a few; such as the Apostles who travelled hither and thither teaching—or perhaps none among us. Yet ought we so to adapt Christ’s doctrine, that all men may profit in it.  

Cyprian, Tr. vii, 14 Justly therefore does the disciple of Christ make petition for today’s provision, without indulging excessive longings in his prayer. It were a self-contradicting and incompatible thing for us who pray that the kingdom of God may quickly come, to be looking unto long life in the world below.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Or; He adds, “daily,” that a man may eat so much only as natural reason requires, not as the lust of the flesh urges. For if you expend on one banquet as much as would suffice you for a hundred days, you are not eating today’s provision, but that of many days.  

Jerome In the Gospel, entitled The Gospel according to the Hebrew, ‘supersubstantialis’ is rendered, ‘mohar,’ that is, ‘tomorrow’s; so that the sense would be, Give us today tomorrow’s bread; i.e., for the time to come.
