# Lecture 5

***10. “Thy kingdom come.”***

> Gloss. ord. It follows suitably, that after our adoption as sons, we should ask a kingdom which is due to sons.

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 6 This is not so said as though God did not now reign on earth, or had not reigned over it always. “Come,” must therefore be taken for “be manifested to men.” For none shall then be ignorant of His kingdom, when His Only-begotten not in understanding only, but in visible shape shall come to judge the quick and dead. This day of judgment the Lord teaches shall then come, when the Gospel shall have been preached to all nations; which thing pertains to the hallowing of God’s name.  

Jerome Either it is a general prayer for the kingdom of the whole world that the reign of the Devil may cease; or for the kingdom in each of us that God may reign there, and that sin may not reign in our mortal body.  

Cyprian, Tr. vii, 8 Or; it is that kingdom which was promised to us by God, and bought with Christ’s blood; that we who before in the world have been servants, may afterwards reign under the dominion of Christ.  

Aug., Epist., 130, 11 For the kingdom of God will come whether we desire it or not. But herein we kindle our desires towards that kingdom, that it may come to us, and that we may reign in it.  

Cassian, Collat., ix, 19 Or, because the Saint knows by the witness of his conscience, that when the kingdom of God shall appear, he shall be partaker therein.  

Jerome But be it noted, that it comes of high confidence, and of an unblemished conscience only, to pray for the kingdom of God, and not to fear the judgment.  

Cyprian The kingdom of God may stand for Christ Himself, whom we day by day wish to come, and for whose advent we pray that it may be quickly manifested to us. As He is our resurrection, because in Him we rise again, so may He be called the kingdom of God, because we are to reign in Him. Rightly we ask for God’s kingdom, that is, for the heavenly, because there is a kingdom of this earth beside. He, however, who has renounced the world, is superior to its honours and to its kingdom; and hence he who dedicates himself to God and to Christ, longs not for the kingdom of earth, but for the kingdom of Heaven.  

Aug., De Don. Pers. 2 When they pray, “Let thy kingdom come,” what else do they pray for who are already holy, but that they may persevere in that holiness they now have given unto them? For no otherwise will the kingdom of God come, than as it is certain it will come to those that persevere unto the end.
