# Lecture 11

14. “For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you:  

> 15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.”

> Rabanus By the word, “Amen.” He shows that without doubt the Lord will bestow all things that are rightly asked, and by those that do not fail in observing the annexed condition, “For if ye forgive men their sins, your heavenly Father will also forgive you your sins.”

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 11 Here we should not overlook that of all the petitions enjoined by the Lord, He judged that most worthy of further enforcement, which relates to forgiveness of sins, in which He would have us merciful; which is the only means of escaping misery.  

Pseudo-Chrys. He does not say that God will first forgive us, and that we should after forgive our debtors. For God knows how treacherous the heart of man is, and that though they should have received forgiveness themselves, yet they do not forgive their debtors; therefore He instructs us first to forgive, and we shall be forgiven after.  

Aug., Enchir., 74 Whoever does not forgive him that in true sorrow seeks forgiveness, let him not suppose that his sins are by any means forgiven of the Lord.  

Cyprian, Tr. vii, 16 For no excuse will abide you in the day of judgment, when you will be judged by your own sentence, and as you have dealt towards others, will be dealt with yourself.  

Jerome But if that which is written, “I said, Ye are gods, but ye shall die like men,” (Ps 82:6–7) is said to those who for their sins deserve to become men instead of gods, then they to whom sins are forgiven are rightly called “men.”  

Chrys. He mentions heaven and the Father to claim our attention, for nothing so likens you to God, as to forgive him who has injured you. And it were indeed unmeet should the son of such a Father become a slave, and should one who has a heavenly vocation live as of this earth, and of this life only.
