# Lecture 5

9. “Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?  

> 10. Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

> 11. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?”

> Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 21 As above He had cited the birds of the air and the lilies of the field, that our hopes may rise from the less to the greater; so also does He in this place, when He says, “Or what man among you?”

Pseudo-Chrys. Lest perchance any one considering how great is the difference between God and man, and weighing his own sins should despair of obtaining, and so never take in hand to ask; therefore He proposes a comparison of the relation between father and son; that should we despair because of our sins, we may hope because of God’s fatherly goodness.  

Chrys. There are two things behoveful for one that prays; that he ask earnestly; and that he ask such things as he ought to ask. And those are spiritual things; as Solomon, because he asked such things as were right, received speedily.  

Pseudo-Chrys. And what are the things that we ought to ask, he shows under the likeness of a loaf, and a fish. The loaf is the word concerning the knowledge of God the Father. The stone is all falsehood that has a stumbling-block of offense to the soul.  

Remig. By the fish we may understand the word concerning Christ, by the serpent the Devil himself. Or by the loaf may be understood spiritual doctrine; by the stone ignorance; by the fish the water of Holy Baptism; by the serpent the wiles of the Devil, or unbelief.  

Rabanus Or; bread which is the common food signifies charity, without which the other virtues are of no avail. The fish signifies faith, which is born of the water of baptism, is tossed in the midst of the waves of this life and yet lives. Luke adds a third thing, “an egg,” (Luke 11:12) which signifies hope; for an egg is the hope of the animal. To charity, He opposes “a stone,” that is, the hardness of hatred; to faith, “a serpent,” that is, the venom of treachery; to hope, “a scorpion,” that is, despair, which stings backward, as the scorpion.  

Remig. The sense therefore is: we need not fear that should we ask of God our Father bread, that is doctrine or love, He will give us a stone; that is, that He will suffer our heart to be contracted either by the frost of hatred or by hardness of soul; or that when we ask for faith, He will suffer us to die of the poison of unbelief. Thence it follows, “If then ye being evil.”  

Chrys. This He said not detracting from human nature, nor confessing the whole human race to be evil; but He calls paternal love “evil” when compared with His own goodness. Such is the superabundance of His love towards men.  

Pseudo-Chrys. Because in comparison of God who is preeminently good, all men seem to be evil, as all light shows dark when compared with the sun.  

Jerome Or perhaps he called the Apostles evil, in their person condemning the whole human race, whose heart is set to evil from his infancy, as we read in Genesis. Nor is it any wonder that He should call this generation, “evil,” as the Apostle also speaks, “Seeing the days are evil.”  

Aug. Or He calls “evil” those who are lovers of this age; *(margin note: Eph 5:16)* whence also the good things which they give are to be called good according to their sense who esteem them as good; nay, even in the nature of things they are goods, that is, temporal goods, and such as pertain to this weak life.  

Aug., Serm., 61, 3 For that good thing which makes men good is God. Gold and silver are good things not as making you good, but as with them you may do good. If then we be evil, yet as having a Father who is good let us not remain ever evil.  

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 21 If then we being evil, know how to give that which is asked of us, how much more is it to be hoped that God will give us good things when we ask Him?  

Pseudo-Chrys. He says “good things,” because God does not give all things to them that ask Him, but only good things.  

Gloss. ord. For from God we receive only such things as are good, of what kind soever they may seem to us when we receive them; for all things work together for good to His beloved.  

Remig. And be it known that where Matthew says, “He shall give good things,” Luke has, “shall give his Holy Spirit.” (Luke 11:13) But this ought not to seem contrary, because all the good things which man receives from God, are given by the grace of the Holy Spirit.
