# Lecture 4

7. “Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you:  

> 8. For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.

> Jerome Having before forbidden us to pray for things of the flesh, He now shows what we ought to ask, saying, “Ask, and it shall be given you.”

Aug. Otherwise; when He commanded not to give the holy thing to dogs, and not to cast pearls before swine, the hearer conscious of his own ignorance might say, Why do you thus bid me not give the holy thing to dogs, when as yet I see not that I have any holy thing? He therefore adds in good season, “Ask, and ye shall receive.”  

Pseudo-Chrys. Otherwise; Having given them some commands for the sanctification of prayer, saying, “Judge not,” He adds accordingly, “Ask, and it shall be given unto you,” as though He were to say, If ye observe this mercy towards your enemies, whatever seems to your shut, “knock, and it shall be opened to you.” Ask therefore in prayer, praying day and night; seek with care and toil; for neither by toiling only in the Scriptures do we gain knowledge without God’s grace, nor do we attain to grace without study, lest the gift of God should be bestowed on the careless. But knock with prayer, and fasting, and alms. For as one who knocks at a door, not only cries out with his voice, but strikes with his hand, so he who does good works, knocks with his works. But you will say, this is what I pray that I may know and do, how then can I do it, before I receive? Do what you can that you may become able to do more, and keep what you know that you may come to know more. Or otherwise; having above commanded all men to love their enemies, and after enjoined that we should not under pretext of love give holy things to dogs; He here gives good counsel, that they should pray God for them, and it shall be granted them; let them seek out those that are lost in sins, and they shall find them; let them knock at those who are shut up in errors, and God shall open to them that their word may have access to their souls. Or otherwise; Since the precepts given above were beyond the reach of human virtue, He sends them to God to whose grace nothing is impossible, saying, “Ask, and it shall be given you,” that what cannot be performed by men may be fulfilled through the grace of God. For when God furnished the other animals with swift foot, or swift wing, with claws, teeth, or horns, He so made man that He Himself should be man’s only strength *(margin note: virtus, see Ps. 18:1)* that forced by reason of his own weakness he might always have need of his Lord.  

Gloss. ord. We ask with faith, we seek with hope, we knock with love. You must first ask that you may have; after that seek that you may find; and lastly, observe what you have found that you may enter in.  

Or, we ask by praying, we seek by right living, we knock by persevering.  

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 21 Asking, is that we may get healthiness of soul that we may be able to fulfill the things commanded us; seeking, pertains to the discovery of the truth. But when any has found the true way, he will then come into actual possession, which however is only opened to him that knocks.  

Aug., Retract., i, 19 How these three differ from one another, I have thought good to unfold with this travail; but it were better to refer them all to instant prayer; wherefore He afterwards concludes, saying, “He will give good things to them that ask him.”  

Chrys. And in that He adds “seek,” and “knock,” HE bids us ask with much importunateness and strength. For one who seeks, casts forth all other things from his mind, and is turned to that thing singly which he seeks; and he that knocks comes with vehemence and warm soul.  

Pseudo-Chrys. He had said, “Ask, and ye shall receive;” which sinners hearing might perchance say, The Lord herein exhorts them that are worthy, but we are unworthy. Therefore He repeats it that He may commend the mercy of God to the righteous as well as to sinners; and therefore declares that “every one that asketh receiveth;” that is, whether he be righteous or a sinner, let him not hesitate to ask; that it may be fully seen that none is neglected but he who hesitates to ask of God. For it is not credible that God should enjoin on men that work of piety which is displayed is doing good to our enemies, and should not Himself (being good) act so.  

Aug., Tract. in Joan. 44, 13 Wherefore God hears sinners; for if He do not hear sinners, the Publican said in vain, “Lord, be merciful to me a sinner;” (Luke 18:13) and by that confession merited justification.  

Aug., Prosper, Sent. 212 He who in faith offers supplication to God for the necessities of this life is heard mercifully, and not heard mercifully. For the physician knows better than the sick man what is good for his sickness. But if he asks that which God both promises and commands, his prayer shall be granted, for love shall receive what truth provides.  

Aug., Ep. 31, 1 But the Lord is good, who often gives us not what we would, that He may give us what we should rather prefer.  

Aug., Serm. in Mont., ii, 21 There is need moreover of perseverance, that we may receive what we ask for.  

Aug., Serm. 61. 5 In that God sometimes delays His gifts, He but recommends, and does not deny them. For that which is long looked for is sweeter when obtained; but that is held cheap, which comes at once. Ask then and seek things righteous. For by asking and seeking grows the appetite of taking. God reserves for you those things which He is not willing to give you at once, that you may learn greatly to desire great things. Therefore we ought always to pray and not to fail.
