# Chapter 69 — That God knows infinite things

***We must next prove that God knows infinite things.***

For in knowing that he is the cause of things, he knows things other than himself, as was shown above. *(Ch. 49.)* Now he is the cause of infinite things, if there be infinite things, since he is the cause of whatever is. Therefore, he knows infinite things.  

Again. God knows his own power perfectly, as was proved above. *(Ch. 47.)* Now, a power cannot be known perfectly unless all the things to which it extends be known, since its quantity is gauged in a manner according to them. But his power, being infinite, as shown above, *(Ch. 43.)* extends to infinite things. Therefore, God knows infinite things.  

Moreover. If God’s knowledge extends to all things that exist, in whatever way they exist, as was shown, *(Cf. ch. 50.)* it follows that he knows not only actual being but also potential being. Now in natural things there is the infinite potentially, although not actually, as the Philosopher proves in *Physics* 3. *(Aristotle, *Physics* 3.4 and following.)* Therefore, God knows infinite things, even as unity (which is the principle of number) would know infinite species of numbers if it knew whatever is potentially in it; for unity is every number potentially.  

Again. God knows other things in his essence as in a exemplar medium. *(Ch. 49.)* Now since he is infinitely perfect, as was shown above, *(Ch. 43.)* it is possible for an infinite number of things with finite perfections to be copied from him. For it is impossible for any single one, or any number of copies, to equal the example of their exemplar: and thus there always remains some new way in which some copy can imitate it. Nothing, therefore, prevents him from knowing infinite things by his essence.  

Further. God’s being is his act of understanding. *(Ch. 45.)* Therefore, even as his being is infinite, as shown above, *(Ch. 43.)* so his act of understanding is infinite. Now, as finite is to finite so is infinite to infinite. If, therefore, by our act of understanding, which is finite, we are able to understand finite things, God also by his act of understanding is able to understand infinite things.  

Moreover. According to the Philosopher, in *On the Soul*, *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 3.4, 429b1–4.)* *an intellect which knows the supremely intelligible knows the less intelligible not less but more*. And the reason for this is that the intellect is not corrupted by the excellence of the intelligible, as the sense is, but is the more perfected. Now if we take an infinite number of beings, whether they be of the same species (like an infinite number of men) or of an infinite number of species (even though some or all of them be infinite in quantity, if this were possible), all of them together would be of less infinity than God: for each one and all together would have being confined and limited to a certain species or genus, and thus would be in some way finite. Therefore, it would fall short from the infinity of God, who is infinite simply, as we proved above. *(Ch. 43.)* Since, therefore, God knows himself perfectly, *(Ch. 47.)* nothing prevents him from also knowing that infinite number of things.  

Further. The more efficacious and clear an intellect is in knowing, the greater the number of things is it able to know from one, even as every power, the stronger it is, the more united it is. Now the divine intellect is infinite in efficacy or perfection, as was shown above. *(Ch. 45.)* Therefore, it can know an infinite number of things by one which is his essence.  

Further. The divine intellect, like the divine essence, is perfect simply. *(Ch. 45.)* Therefore, no intellectual perfection is lacking to it. Now that to which our intellect is in potency is its intellectual perfection, and it is in potency to all intelligible species. But these species are infinite in number, since the species of numbers and figures are infinite. It follows, therefore, that God knows all like infinite things.  

Again. Since our intellect is cognizant of the infinite in potency (for it is able to multiply the species of numbers indefinitely), if the divine intellect did not also know the infinite in act, it would follow either that our intellect knows more things than the divine intellect knows, or that the divine intellect does not know actually all the things that it knows potentially: and each of these is impossible, as proved above, *(Cf. cc. 16, 29.)*  

Further. The infinite is repugnant to knowledge insofar as it is incompatible with being counted: for it is in itself impossible for the parts of the infinite to be numbered, as implying a contradiction. Now the knowledge of a thing by counting its parts belongs to an intellect that knows one part after another in succession, and not to one that understands the various parts together. Since, then, the divine intellect knows things together without succession, it is no more hindered from knowing the infinite than from knowing the finite.  

Moreover. All quantity consists in a certain plurality of parts, for which reason number is the first of quantities. Accordingly, where plurality involves no difference, neither does it cause any difference consequent upon quantity. Now, in God’s knowledge, many things are known in the same way as one, since they are known not by various species, but by one, which is God’s essence. *(Ch. 46.)* Therefore, many things are known by God simultaneously, and consequently plurality makes no difference in God’s knowledge. Neither, therefore, does the infinite which is consequent upon quantity. *(Aristotle, *Physics* 1.2, 185a32–b4.)* Therefore, knowledge, whether of infinite or of finite things, differs not to the divine intellect. And consequently, since it knows finite things, nothing prevents it from knowing also infinite things.  

The words of the Psalm are in agreement with this: *and of his wisdom there is no number* (Ps 147[146]:5).  

From the foregoing it is clear why our intellect does not know the infinite as the divine intellect does. For our intellect differs from the divine intellect in four respects, which constitute this difference. In the first place, our intellect is simply finite, but the divine intellect is infinite. Second, our intellect knows different things by different species: therefore, it cannot grasp infinite things by one knowledge, as the divine intellect can. The third difference results from the fact that our intellect, since it knows different things by different species, cannot know many things at the same time, so that it cannot know an infinite number of things except by taking them one after the other. But it is not so in the divine intellect, which considers many things simultaneously, as seen by one species. Fourth, because the divine intellect is about things that are and things that are not, as we proved above. *(Ch. 66.)*  

It is also clear in what way the saying of the Philosopher *that the infinite, as such, is unknown*, is not in contradiction with this statement. *(Cf. ch. 63.)* For, since, as he says, *(Aristotle, *Physics* 1.4.)* the notion of infinity is becoming to quantity, the infinite would be known as such, if it were known by the measuring of its parts, because this is proper knowledge of quantity. *(*ST* I.14.12, ad 1.)* But God does not know thus. Therefore, so to say, he knows the infinite not as such, but inasmuch as it is finite in comparison with his knowledge, as we have shown.  

It must be observed, however, that God does not know infinite things by his knowledge of vision, *(Cf. ch. 66.)* to use the expression employed by others, because the infinite neither is, nor was, nor will be actual; according to the Catholic faith, generation is not infinite on either part. Yet he knows the infinite by his knowledge of simple intelligence. For God knows the infinite number of things that neither are, nor will be, nor have been, and nevertheless are in the power of a creature. He knows also the infinite things that are in his power, that neither are, nor have been, nor shall be.  

Therefore, as regards the question about the knowledge of singulars, we might reply by denying the major premise, for singulars are not infinite. If, however, they were, God would know them nonetheless.
