# Chapter 94 — That the contemplative virtues are in God

***There can be no doubt that the contemplative virtues are most becoming to God.***

For, since wisdom consists in the knowledge of the highest causes, according to the Philosopher at the beginning of his *Metaphysics*, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 1.1, 981b13–982a3; 1.2, 982a4–982b10.)* and since God knows himself principally, nor knows anything save by knowing himself, the first cause of all, as we have proved, *(Cc. 47–50.)* it is evident that wisdom ought to be especially ascribed to him. Hence we read: *he is wise in heart* (Job 9:4); and: *all wisdom comes from the Lord and is with him forever* (Sir 1:1). The Philosopher, too, says at the beginning of his *Metaphysics*, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 1.2, 982b28–983a10.)* that *it is a divine, not a human, possession*.  

Again. Since science is the knowledge of a thing by its proper cause, *(Aristotle, *Posterior Analytics* 1.2, 71b9–11.)* and since he knows the order of all causes and effects, as we have shown above, *(Cc. 64–71.)* it is evident that science is properly in him: not, however, that science which is caused by reasoning, *(Ch. 57.)* as our science is caused by a demonstration. Hence it is written: *the Lord is a God of knowledge* (1 Sam 2:3).  

Further. Since immaterial knowledge of things without discoursing is understanding *(Cf. Aristotle, *Nicomachean Ethics* 6.6.)* and since God has this kind of knowledge about all things, as proved above, *(Ch. 57.)* it follows that in him is understanding. Hence we read: *he has counsel and understanding* (Job 12:13).  

In God these virtues are the exemplars of ours, as the perfect of the imperfect.
