# Chapter 44 — That distinction among things did not result from the diversity of merits or demerits

It remains now for us to show that the distinction among things did not result from different movements of the free will of rational creatures, as Origen maintained in his *Peri Archon*. *(Origen, *On First Principles [Peri archon]*, bk. 2, ch. 9.)* For he wished to refute the objections and errors of the early heretics, who strove to prove that the different nature of good and evil in things is owing to contrary agents. But on account of the great difference which he observed both in natural and in human things, which difference apparently is not preceded by any merits—for instance, that some bodies are white, some dark, that some are born of pagans, some of Christians—he was compelled to assert that all differences to be found in things have proceeded from a difference of merits, in accordance with the justice of God. For he says that God, of his mere goodness, first made all creatures equal, all of them being spiritual and rational, and these by their free will were moved in diverse ways, some adhering to God more, and some less, some withdrawing from God more, and some less. In this way, there resulted various grades in spiritual substances through divine justice, so that some were angels in their various orders, some human souls in their various states, some demons in their various states. On account of the diversity among rational creatures, he said that God had established diversity among corporeal creatures, so that the more noble spiritual substances were united to the more noble bodies, and thus the corporeal creature would minister in all other various ways to the diversity of spiritual substances.  

But this opinion is clearly convicted of falsehood. For among effects, the better a thing is, the more does it obtain precedence in the intention of the agent. Now the greatest good in things created is the perfection of the universe, consisting in the order of distinct things, because in all things the perfection of the whole takes precedence of the perfection of each part. Therefore, the diversity of things results from the principal intention of the first agent, and not from a diversity of merits.  

Again. If all rational creatures were created equal from the beginning, we must say that one of them does not depend on another in its action. Now that which results from the concurrence of various causes, one of which does not depend on another, is casual. Therefore, according to the aforesaid opinion, this distinction and order of things is casual: and this is impossible, as proved above. *(Ch. 39.)*  

Moreover. That which is natural to a person is not acquired by him by his will, for the movement of the will, or free will, presupposes the existence of the willer, and for this his nature is required. Accordingly, if the various grades of rational creatures were derived from a movement of the free will, all rational creatures would have their respective grade not naturally, but accidentally. But this is impossible. For, since the specific difference is natural to each thing, it would follow that all created rational substances—namely, angels, demons, human souls, and the souls of the heavenly bodies (which Origen supposed to be animated)—are of one species. That this is false is proved by the diversity of natural actions, because the mode by which the human intellect naturally understands is not the same as that which sense and imagination, or the angelic intellect and the soul of the sun demand—unless perhaps we picture the angels and heavenly bodies with flesh and bones and like parts, so that they may have organs of sense, which is absurd. It follows, therefore, that the diversity of intellectual substances is not the result of a diversity of merits, which are according to movements of the free will.  

Again. If things that are natural are not acquired by a movement of the free will, in contrast, the union of a rational soul with such a body is acquired by the soul on account of preceding merit or demerit according to the movement of the free will, it would follow that the union of this soul with this body is not natural. Therefore, neither is the composite natural. Yet man and the sun and the stars, according to Origen, are composed of rational substances and such and such bodies. Therefore, all these things which are the noblest of corporeal substances are unnatural.  

Again. If the union of this rational substance with this body is becoming to this rational substance not as such a substance, but as having so merited, its union with this body is not an essential but an accidental union. Now, a species does not result from things united accidentally, because from such a union there does not result a thing essentially one: for “white man” or “clothed man” is not a species. It would follow, therefore, that man is not a species, nor yet the sun, nor the moon, nor anything of the kind.  

Moreover. Those things which result from merit may be changed for better or for worse, because merits and demerits may increase or diminish, especially according to Origen, who said that the free will of every creature is always flexible to either side. Therefore, if a rational soul has been allotted this body on account of preceding merit or demerit, it will follow that it can be united again to another body, and not only that the human soul takes another human body, but also that it may sometimes take a sidereal body, which is in accordance with the Pythagorean fable, that any soul enters any body. *(Aristotle, *On the Soul* 1.3, 404a16–19.)* This is both erroneous according to philosophy—which teaches that determinate matters and movables are allotted to determinate forms and movers—and heretical according to faith, which declares that in the resurrection the soul resumes the same body which it has left.  

Further. Since there can be no multitude without distinction, if from the beginning rational creatures were formed in any number, they must have had some diversity. Therefore, one of them had something which another had not. And if this was not the result of a difference in merit, for the same reason neither was it necessary for the difference of grades to result from a difference of merits.  

Again. Every distinction is either according to a division of quantity, which is only in bodies—therefore, according to Origen, it could not be in the bodies first created—or according to formal division. But this latter cannot be without distinction of grades, since such a distinction is reduced to that of privation and form: and thus one of the condivided forms must be better and the other less good. Hence, according to the Philosopher, *(Aristotle, *Metaphysics* 7.3, 1029a27–32; 7.4, 1029b28–1030a17.)* the species of things are like numbers, one of which is in addition to or in subtraction from the other. Accordingly, if there were many rational substances created from the beginning, there must have been a distinction of grades among them.  

Again. If rational creatures can subsist without bodies, there was no need to set up a distinction in the corporeal nature on account of the various merits of rational creatures, since even without a diversity of bodies it was possible to find various grades in rational substances. And if rational substances cannot subsist without bodies, it follows that the corporeal creature also was formed from the beginning together with the rational creature. Now, the corporeal creature is further removed from the spiritual than spiritual creatures are from one another. If, therefore, from the beginning God established such a great distance among his creatures without any previous merits, there was no need for a difference of merits to precede in order that rational creatures should be established in different grades.  

Further. If the diversity of corporeal creatures corresponds to the diversity of spiritual creatures, for the same reason the uniformity of corporeal nature would correspond to the uniformity of rational creatures. Therefore, the corporeal nature would have been created even if the preceding merits of the rational creature had been not different, but uniform. Hence prime matter would have been created, which is common to all bodies, but under one form only. But in it there are many forms in potency. Therefore, it would have remained imperfect, its one form alone being reduced to act: and this is unbefitting the divine goodness.  

Again. If the diversity of the corporeal creature results from the different movements of the rational creature’s free will, we shall have to say that the reason why there is only one sun in the world is because only one rational creature was moved by its free will in such a way as to merit to be united to such a body. Now, it was by chance that only one sinned thus. Therefore, it is by chance that there is only one sun in the world, and not for the need of corporeal nature.  

Further. Since the spiritual creature does not merit to be degraded except for sin—yet it is degraded from its height, in which it is invisible, through being united to visible bodies—it would seem to follow that visible bodies are joined to spiritual creatures on account of sin. And this would seem to approach to the error of the Manicheans who said that these visible things proceeded from the evil principle. *(Ch. 49.)*  

The authority of Sacred Scripture is in evident contradiction with this error. For in each making of visible creatures Moses speaks in terms such as these: *God saw that it was good* (Gen 1:9), and afterwards in reference to all, he adds: *God saw everything that he had made, and it was very good* (Gen 1:31). Hence we are clearly given to understand that the corporeal and visible creatures were made because it is good for them to be, and this is in keeping with the divine goodness, and not on account of any merits or sins of rational creatures.  

Origen seems not to have taken into consideration that when we give a thing not as a due, but as a free gift, it is not contrary to justice if we give unequal things without weighing the difference of merits, since payment is due to those who merit. Now God, as stated above, *(Ch. 28.)* brought things into being not as though it were due to them, but out of mere bounty. Therefore, the diversity of creatures does not presuppose diversity of merits.  

Again, since the good of the whole is better than the good of each part, it does not befit the best maker to lessen the good of the whole in order to increase the good of some of the parts: thus a builder does not give to the foundation the goodness which he gives to the roof, lest he should make a house in ruins. Therefore, God, the maker of all, would not make the whole universe the best of its kind if he made all the parts equal, because many degrees of goodness would be wanting to the universe, and thus it would be imperfect.
