# Chapter 57 — That every intellect of any degree can participate in the divine vision

Since, as we have proved, *(Ch. 53.)* the created intellect is raised by a kind of supernatural light to the vision of the divine substance, there is no created intellect with a nature of so low a degree that cannot be raised to this vision.  

For we have proved *(Ch. 53.)* that this light cannot be connatural to any creature, but surpasses every created nature in its power. Now that which is done by a supernatural power is not hindered by any diversity of nature, since the divine power is infinite; so that in the miraculous healing of a sick man, it matters not whether he ails much or little. Consequently, the difference of degrees in the intellectual nature does not prevent the lowest in that nature from being raised by the aforesaid light to that vision.  

Again. The highest intellect in the order of nature is infinitely distant from God in perfection and goodness, but its distance from the lowest intellect is finite: for there cannot be an infinite distance between one finite thing and another. Consequently, the distance between the lowest created intellect and the highest is as nothing in comparison with the distance between the highest created intellect and God. Now that which is as nothing cannot cause an appreciable variation: thus the distance between the center of the earth and the human eye is as nothing in comparison with the distance between the human eye and the eighth sphere, compared with which the earth occupies the space of a mere point. For which reason no appreciable variation arises from astronomers considering the human eye as the center of the earth in their demonstrations. It makes no difference, therefore, what intellect be raised by the aforesaid light to the vision of God, whether it be of the highest, or of the lowest, or of a middle degree.  

Besides. It was proved above *(Ch. 50.)* that every intellect desires naturally to see the divine substance. Now the natural desire cannot be void. Therefore, every created intellect can arrive at the vision of the divine substance, the lowliness of its nature being no obstacle.  

Hence it is that our Lord promises men the glory of the angels: *They shall be*, he says, speaking of men, *like the angels of God in heaven* (Matt 22:30). And it is stated that the measure of a man is that of an angel (Rev 21:17). For this reason nearly everywhere in Sacred Scripture angels are described in the form of men, either wholly, as the angels who appeared to Abraham in the likeness of men (Gen 18:2), or in part, as may be seen in the animals of which it is said that *under their wings on their four sides they had human hands* (Ezek 1:8).  

Hereby we refute the error of those who said that however much the human soul be raised, it cannot attain to an equality with the higher intellects.
