# Chapter 115 — That the divine law directs man chiefly to God

***From this we may gather what is the principal intention of the divine law.***

For it is evident that every lawgiver intends by his law to direct men to his own end, as the commander-in-chief leads to victory, and the governor of a state to peace. Now the end intended by God is God himself. Therefore, the chief intention of the divine law is to lead men to God.  

Again. Law, as stated above, *(Ch. 114.)* is a rule which God’s governing providence sets before the rational creature. Now the government of God’s providence leads each thing to its proper end. Consequently, the law given by God directs man chiefly to his end. But the end of the human creature is to adhere to God, since in this does his happiness consist, as we have proved above. *(Ch. 37.)* Therefore, the divine law directs man chiefly to union with God.  

Also. The intention of every lawgiver is to make those good for whom he legislates: hence precepts of law should be about acts of virtue. *(*Nicomachean Ethics* 1.13.)* Therefore, the divine law aims at those acts that are best. Now, of all human acts the best are those whereby man adheres to God, as being most akin to his end. Therefore, the divine law directs man to these acts before all others.  

Besides. That which gives a law its force should hold the chief place in the law. But the law given by God derives its force with men from men being subject to God; for no one is bound by the law of a king whose subject he is not. Therefore, the union of man’s mind with God should be the chief thing in the divine law.  

Hence it is written: *What does the Lord your God require of you, but to fear the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways, to love him, to serve the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul* (Deut 10:12).
