# Chapter 145 — That sins are punished also by the sinner being subjected to some kind of pain

Those who sin against God are to be punished not only by forfeiting beatitude forever, but also by being subjected to some kind of pain. For punishment should be proportionate to fault, as we proved above. *(Ch. 42.)* Now, when a man sins, his mind not only turns away from his last end, but also turns unduly to other things as ends. Therefore, the sinner should be punished not only by being debarred from his end, but also by experiencing hurt from other things.  

Again. Punishments are inflicted for sins that men may be withdrawn from sin through fear of being punished, as stated above. *(Ch. 144.)* Now no one fears to lose what he desires not to get. Consequently, those whose will is turned away from their last end do not fear to lose it. Hence they would not be recalled from sinning by the mere loss of their last end. Therefore, some other punishment, which sinners would fear, should be inflicted on them.  

Also. If a man abuses the means to an end, not only is he debarred from the end, but he incurs some other hurt besides: for instance, food taken injudiciously not only does not strengthen, but even causes sickness. Now the man who places his end in creatures does not use them as he should, namely, by referring them to his last end. Therefore, he should be punished not only by forfeiting beatitude, but also by undergoing some hurt from them.  

Besides. As good things are due to well-doers, so evil things are due to evil-doers. Now those who do aright reap perfection and joy in the end intended by them. Therefore, on the other hand, such a punishment is due to sinners that they reap pain and hurt from the things in which they place their end.  

Hence it is that Sacred Scripture threatens sinners not only with exclusion from glory, but also with affliction from other things. For it is said: *Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels* (Matt 25:41); and: *On the wicked he will rain coals of fire and brimstone; a scorching wind shall be the portion of their cup* (Ps 11:6[10:7]).  

Hereby we refute the opinion of Algazel, who said that the only punishment given to sinners is their loss of their last end.
