# Chapter 114 — That laws are given by God to man

It is evident from this that it was necessary for man to receive laws from God. For, as we have shown, *(Ch. 113.)* just as the acts of irrational creatures are directed by God, inasmuch as they belong to the species, so are man’s actions directed by God, inasmuch as they belong to the individual. Now, insofar as they are actions belonging to the species, actions of irrational creatures are directed by God by a certain natural inclination, which is consequent to the specific nature. Therefore, in addition to this, something must be given to man whereby he is directed in his personal actions. And this is what we call law.  

Again. The rational creature, as stated above, *(Ch. 113.)* is subject to divine providence in such a way as to participate in a certain likeness of divine providence, inasmuch as it is able to govern itself in its own actions, and other things also. Now, that by which the actions of people are governed is a law. Therefore, it was reasonable that a law should be given to man by God.  

Besides. Since a law is nothing else than a reason and rule of action, it is reasonable that to those alone a law be given who know the reason of their action. Now, this applies only to the rational creature. Therefore, it was fitting that a law should be given to the rational creature alone.  

Further. A law should be given to those in whom is the power to act or not to act. But this belongs to the rational creature alone. Therefore, only the rational creature is adapted to receive a law.  

Moreover. Since a law is nothing else than a reason of action, and the reason for everyone’s action is his end, everyone who is capable of receiving a law must receive the law from the one who guides him to his end, even as the inferior craftsman is guided by the master-craftsman, and the soldier by the commander-in-chief. Now, the rational creature obtains his last end in God and from God, as we have already shown. *(Ch. 37, 52.)* Therefore, it was reasonable that a law should be given to men by God.  

Hence it is said: *I will put my law within them, and I will write it upon their hearts* (Jer 31:33), and: *I shall write to him my manifold laws* (Hos 8:12).
