# Chapter 60 — On confirmation

The perfection of spiritual strength is attained, properly speaking, when a man dares to confess his faith in Christ in the presence of anyone and is not held back by confusion or fear, since fortitude dispels inordinate fear. Accordingly, the sacrament whereby spiritual strength is conferred on one who is regenerate makes him a soldier of Christ’s faith. And, as soldiers carry the banner of the prince under whom they fight, those who receive the sacrament of confirmation receive the banner of Christ—namely, the sign of the cross—by which he fought and conquered. They receive this sign on their brow to indicate that they are not ashamed to make public profession of their faith in Christ.  

Moreover, the cross is signed on them with a mixture of oil and balsam, called chrism. The reason of this is as follows. Oil signifies the power of the Holy Spirit, by whom Christ, as the word implies, was anointed (and thus Christians take their name from Christ as fighting under him). Balsam signifies a good name on account of its fragrance, which those should have who live among worldly people, so that, marching forth on to the field of battle from the hidden stronghold of the Church, they may make public profession of their faith in Christ.  

Moreover, this sacrament is fittingly conferred by bishops only. For they are the commanding officers of the Christian army, and in worldly warfare it belongs to the commander-in-chief to choose those whom he appoints to military service. Hence those who receive this sacrament are chosen for service in the spiritual combat, for which reason the bishop lays his hand upon them, to signify that they receive strength from Christ.
