# Chapter 3 — That the Son of God is God

We must also observe that Sacred Scripture employs the aforesaid expressions to denote the creation of things: for it is said: *Has the rain a father,* *or who has begotten the drops of dew?* *From whose womb did the ice come forth,* *and who has given birth to the hoarfrost of heaven?* (Job 38:28–29). Lest, therefore, the words ‘paternity,’ ‘filiation,’ and ‘generation’ should convey nothing but the idea of the efficacy of the creation, the authority of Scripture does not omit to declare the divinity of him whom it describes as son and begotten, so that the aforesaid generation denotes something more than creation. For it is said: *In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God* (John 1:1). And that the name ‘Word’ designates the Son is shown from what follows, for he adds: *The Word became flesh and dwelt among us, full of grace and truth; we have beheld his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father* (John 1:14). Again Paul says: *When the goodness and loving kindness of God our Savior appeared* (Titus 3:4).  

Nor did the Scripture of the Old Testament leave this unsaid, since it calls Christ by the name of God: for it is said: *Your divine throne endures forever and ever; your royal scepter is a scepter of equity;* *you love righteousness and hate wickedness* (Ps 45[44]:7). And that these words refer to Christ is clear from what follows: *Therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness above your fellows* (Ps 45[44]:8). It is also written: *For to us a child is born,* *to us a son is given; and the government will be upon his shoulder,* *and his name will be called wonderful counselor, mighty God, everlasting father, prince of peace* (Isa 9:6).  

Accordingly, we are taught from Sacred Scripture that the Son of God, begotten of God, is God. And Peter confessed that Jesus Christ is the Son of God when he said: *You are the Christ, the Son of the living God* (Matt 16:16). Therefore, he is not merely the only-begotten, but is also God.
