# Chapter 88 — The sex and age of those who will rise again

We must not deem, however, as some have done, that the female sex will be lacking in the bodies of those who rise again. Since defects of nature are to be repaired in the resurrection, the bodies of those who will rise from the dead will lack none of the things that belong to the perfection of nature. Now, just as other members of the body belong to the integrity of the human body, so do those that serve the purpose of generation, both in man and in woman. Therefore, bodies will rise again with these members.  

Nor is this obviated by the fact that there will be no use for these members, as we have proved. *(Ch. 83.)* If that were a sufficient reason for dispensing with those members, the members that are used for taking nourishment would equally be absent in those who will rise again, since neither will there be any use for food after the resurrection. And thus a considerable number of members would be lacking in the bodies of those who will rise from the dead. Therefore, none of those members will be lacking, although they will not have their use; yet not without purpose, since they will serve to restore the integrity of the human body.  

Nor does the weakness of the female sex prejudice the perfection of those who will rise again, because that is not a weakness in default of nature, but intended by nature. Moreover, this very distinction in nature, by extending to all things, will serve as a proof of nature’s perfection, and as an indication of Divine Wisdom disposing all things in order.  

Nor need we be moved to think otherwise by the words of the Apostle: *Until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ* (Eph 4:13). This does not mean that at this meeting, when those who will rise from the dead shall go into the air to meet Christ, each one will belong to the male sex; but is intended to indicate the perfection and power of the Church. The whole Church will be like *a perfect man* going forth to meet Christ, as is clear from what we have been saying, and from what we have yet to say.  

All will rise again at the age of Christ, which is the age of youth, because it is only at that age that nature is perfect. For the child has not yet grown so as to have reached the perfection of nature, and old age has overpassed it through decay.
