# Chapter 96 — On the last judgment

We gather from what has been said that a twofold award is assigned to men’s deeds in this life: one, with respect to the soul, is received as soon as the soul departs from the body; the other will be when the soul returns to the body, and some will return to an impassible and glorious body, some to a passible and base body. The first award is made to each one separately, inasmuch as each one dies separately; but the second award will be made to all at the same time, inasmuch as all will rise together. Now there must be a judgment whenever different awards are made according to difference of merits. Consequently, there must be a twofold judgment: the first is in which each soul receives separately its reward or punishment; the other is a general judgment, when all at the same time will receive the award due to their merits as to soul and body.  

And since Christ, in his human nature, by his Passion and Resurrection, merited for us resurrection and eternal life, it is fitting that he should preside at this general judgment, in which those who have risen from the dead will be rewarded or punished. Hence it is said of him: *He* *has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man* (John 5:27).  

Now the judgment should be in keeping with the things that are judged. And, seeing that the last judgment will refer to the rewards and punishments due to visible bodies, it is fitting for that judgment to be carried out visibly. Therefore, Christ will judge in his human form, which all will be able to see, both good and wicked. But the sight of his divinity is beatific, as we have proved, *(Bk. 3, ch. 51.)* so that he can be seen thus by the good alone. On the other hand, the judgment of souls, since it is about things invisible, will be enacted invisibly.  

Moreover, although Christ, at the last judgment, will exercise the authority of judge, nevertheless, others will judge with him as assessors. And these will be those who were most closely united to him:, namely, the apostles, to whom it was said: *You who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel* (Matt 19:28), which promise extends to those who follow in the footsteps of the apostles.
