# Lecture 5

> 16 "A little while, and you will see me no more; again a little while, and you will see me [because I go to the Father]." 17 Some of his disciples said to one another, "What is this that he says to us, 'A little while, and you will not see me, and again a little while, and you will see me', and, 'because I go to the Father'?" 18 They said, "What does he mean by 'a little while'? We do not know what he means." 19 Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him; so he said to them, "Is this what you are asking yourselves, what I meant by saying, 'A little while, and you will not see me, and again a little while, and you will see me'? 20 Truly, truly, I say to you, you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice, you will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will turn into joy. 21 When a woman is in travail she has sorrow, because her hour has come; but when she is delivered of the child, she no longer remembers the anguish, for joy that a child [man] is born into the world. 22 So you have sorrow now, but I will see you again and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you." [25]

2116 Above, our Lord explained one reason for their consolation, that was his promise of the Holy Spirit. Here he gives the second, which is that they will see him again. First, the promise that they will see him again is made; secondly, we see the perplexity of the disciples (v 17); and thirdly, their perplexity is answered (v 19).

2117 When our Lord foretold that he would leave his disciples, he also promised that they would see him again. He insists on this several times so that by considering the fact that he would come again they might better endure his absence. He actually mentions three things to console them: his absence will be brief; he will be with them again; and he will leave with honor.

2118 His absence is brief because **a little while and you will see me no more,** so that the **little while** refers to the time when **you will see me no more.** It is like saying: I will be taken from you by death **and you will see me no more**; but do not be sad, because the time during which you will not see me will be a **little while,** for I will rise at dawn, that is, on the third day: "Hide yourselves for a little while until the wrath is past" (Is 26:20).

2119 Yet I will be with you again because **again a little while**, that is, during a brief time after the resurrection, for forty days, "appearing to them during forty days" (Acts 1:3), **you will see me:** "Then the disciples were glad when they saw the Lord" (20:20).

2120 And this is because I am leaving with honor, because I go to the Father: "As they were looking on, he was lifted up" (Acts 1:9).

Another interpretation would be that the **little while** refers to the time before Christ's death, so that the meaning is: It will just be a **little while** until I am taken from you, that is, on the morrow: "Yet a little while I am with you" (13:33). **And you will see me no more**, that is, in mortal form, because "yet a little while, and the world will see me no more," as mortal (14:19); yet it will see him at the judgment and coming in majesty. But the disciples will see Christ when immortal, after the resurrection, because as we read in Acts (10:40): "God... made him manifest, not to all the people but to us who were chosen by God as witnesses." And so he adds, **a little while, and you will see me,** for I will remain in death only for a little while: "In a moment of indignation I hid my face from you for a little while" [Is 54:8].

Or this **little while** and we will see him can refer to the time of our entire life until the judgment; and then we will see Christ at the judgment and in glory. It is called a "little while" in relation to eternity: "For a thousand years in your sight are but as yesterday when it is past" (Ps 90:4). **Because I go to the Father,** by my resurrection and ascension: "Jesus knew that his hour had come to depart out of this world to the Father" (13:1).

2121 Now we see the perplexity of the disciples: first, they talk it over among themselves; secondly, we see the reason for their perplexity; and thirdly, we see their point of view and attitude.

2122 The disciples questioned one another about the Lord's statement, saying, **What does he mean by a little while?** They show an admirable respect for Christ for it was so great that they did not presume to question him. The angels do the same: "Who is this that comes from Edom, in crimsoned garments from Bozrah" (Is 63:1). And he answers: "It is I who am speaking of righteousness and a defender who saves you" [Is 63:1]. We see from the words of the disciples that they did not yet have a complete understanding of what Christ said, either because they were still sunk in sorrow or because the words themselves were obscure: "Are you also still without understanding?" (Mt 15:16).

2123 The reason for their perplexity was that Christ's statements seemed to be incompatible. They understood well enough when he said, **you will not see me**, and **because I go to the Father**. But they were perplexed as to how they could see the same person a little while after he had died, for they did not yet know of the resurrection, and we read "What man can live and never see death? Who can deliver his soul from the power of Sheol?" (Ps 89:48); "No one has been known to return from Hades" (Wis 2:1).

2124 This is why the disciples say, **What does he mean by a little while and we will see him?** **We do not know what he means**, they reply in an unassuming way. As Augustine remarks, when some do not understand the words of Scripture they belittle it, preferring their own theories to the authority of Scripture. Yet others, when they do not understand, unpretentiously admit their own lack of knowledge: "I am... a man who is weak and short-lived, with little understanding of judgment and laws" (Wis 9:5). [26] This is what the apostles are doing here, for they do not say that Christ was wrong or that he said nothing. They ascribe their lack of understanding to their own ignorance.

2125 Now their perplexity is revealed. First, it is acknowledged [by Christ]; secondly, it is cleared up (v 20); and thirdly Christ presents a similar situation (v 21).

2126 He does two things about the first. First, he shows how the perplexity of the disciples was recognized by Christ, when he says, **Jesus knew**, by reason of his divinity, **that they wanted to ask him,** about this difficulty: "He himself knew what was in man" (2:25); "Man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart" (1 Sam 16:7). Then he shows how this recognition was expressed in words, when Christ said to them, **Is this what you are asking yourselves... ?** "I made them known; then suddenly I did them and they came to pass" (Is 48:3).

2127 Now he explains his words and removes the perplexity of the disciples, not just repeating what he had said, but setting their minds at ease. First, he states that there will be a division of those who are sad and those who are joyful; secondly, he mentions their own interior sorrow; and thirdly, the joy that will follow.

2128 About the first, he says, **Truly, truly I say to you** that during that little while in which you will not see me **you will weep**, groaning aloud in sad tones, and lament, shedding tears: "She weeps bitterly in the night," referring to the first, "tears on her cheeks" referring to the second (Lam 1:2); "Keep your voice from weeping" (Jer 31:16).

2129 But their interior sadness will be in contrast to the joy of the world. Thus he says, **but the world will rejoice.** This can be understood in a particular way as referring to the time of Christ's passion, and then **the world,** that is, the Scribes and Pharisees, **will rejoice** that Christ is killed: "Ah, this is the day we longed for; now we have it; we see it!" (Lam 2:16). Or **the world,** that is the evil members of the Church, will rejoice that the saints are persecuted: "The inhabitants of the earth will rejoice" [Rev 17:8]. Or in a general sense, **the world,** those living carnally, **will rejoice** in worldly things: "And behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine" (Is 22:13).

The sorrow of the disciples follows, and so he says, **you will be sorrowful,** because of the sufferings you will have in this world, or rather at my being killed. This is the way the saints are saddened: by the sufferings they endure at the hands of the world and by sin: "For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation" (2 Cor 7:10).

2130 Yet joy will follow this sadness, because your sorrow, which you will experience over my passion, will turn into joy, at my resurrection: "The disciples were glad when they saw the Lord" (20:20). And in general, the sorrow of all the saints will be turned into the joy of the future life: "Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted" (Mt 5:4); "He that goes forth weeping, bearing the seed for sowing, shall come home with shouts of joy" (Ps 126:6). For the saints weep as they sow during this time of merit, but they will rejoice at the reaping, during the time of reward.

2131 Now our Lord mentions a similar case and then draws the parallels. The similar instance he gives is that of a woman about to give birth. First, he mentions the sorrow she has while in labor; and secondly, her joy once her child is born (v 21).

2132 In regard to the first he says, **When a woman is in travail she has sorrow**, very great sensible sorrow, **because her hour of pain has come**: "Anguish as of a woman in travail" (Ps 48:6). We can understand this pain as the pain of the passion of Christ, which was the greatest: "Look and see if there is any pain like my pain" [Lam 1:12]. We can also see in it the pain of the saints when repentant over their sins: "Like a woman with child, who writhes and cries out in her pangs, when she is near her time, so were we because of you, O Lord" (Is 26:17).

2133 Now he mentions the joy when it is over. After a birth there is a double joy: one, because the pain is past; the other, and greater, is over the birth of the child. This joy is greater if the child is of the male sex, since the male is complete, while the female is incomplete and fortuitous. "Cursed be the man who brought the news to my father, 'A son is born to you!"' (Jer 20:15). And in Genesis, when Sara conceived she said, "God has made laughter for me; everyone who hears will laugh with me" [Gen 21:6]. So he says, **but when she is delivered of the child, she no longer remembers the anguish,** rejoicing that the pain is over, but even more **for joy that a man is born into the world.**

This image is appropriate to Christ because by his suffering he delivered us from the anguish of death and gave birth to a new man, that is, he conferred on human nature a newness of life and glory which were not yet known to us. Thus he does not say, "a child is born," but rather **a man is born**, because Christ, in his human nature, rose from the dead, renewed, with the newness of a child at birth. This image also fits the Church militant, which walks in a newness of life; and the Church triumphant, which walks in a newness of glory. He does not say, "There will be no anguish," but **she no longer remembers the anguish,** because even though the saints in glory will remember the afflictions they endured, they will not experience them.

2134 Here he draws the parallels. As regards the present sorrow the apostles were experiencing he says, **So you have sorrow now**, now being from the time of my passion, and the sorrow is over my death: "What is this conversation which you are holding with each other as you walk and look sad?" [Lk 24:17]. Or now, during your entire life, you have sorrow: "You will weep and lament" (16:20).

As regards their future joy he says, **but I will see you again**. This is the same as if he said "you will see me," because we can see him only if he shows himself. Yet he does not say, "You will see me," but **I will see you**, because this showing of himself to us springs from his compassion, which the very sight of him indicates. He says, **I will see you again**, at my resurrection and in future glory: "Your eyes will see the king in his beauty" (Is 33:17).

Secondly, he promises them a joyful heart and gladness, saying, **and your hearts will rejoice,** when you see me at my resurrection. Thus the Church sings: "This is the day the Lord has made: let us rejoice and be glad." **And your hearts will rejoice** at the vision of my glory: "Your face will fill me with joy" [Ps 16:11]; "Then you shall see and be radiant, your heart shall thrill and rejoice" (Is 60:5). For it is natural for each one to rejoice at the sight of what is loved. Now no one can see the divine essence unless he loves it: "He shows it to his friend, as it is his possession" [Job 36:33]. And so it is necessary that joy follow upon this vision: "You shall see," knowing with your mind, "and your heart shall rejoice" (Is 66:14). This joy will even spill over on to the body when it is glorified, and so Isaiah continues: "Your bones shall flourish like the grass"; "Enter into the joy of your master" (Mt 25:21).

Thirdly, he promises that this joy will last forever, saying, **and no one will take your joy from you,** that is, the joy you will have over my resurrection will not be taken from you, like the Jews took your joy during my passion. And this is because "Christ rising from the dead will never die again; death no longer has dominion over him" [Rom 6:9] Or, your joy in the fullness of your glory **no one will take from you** since it cannot be lost and is continuous: "Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads" (Is 35:10). For we will not lose this joy for ourselves by sin since our wills shall be fixed in the good; and no one can take this joy from us because then there will be no violence and no injuries will be inflicted on us, etc.
