# Lecture 8 — Plotting of the chief priests

^11:54^ After this, Jesus did not walk openly among the Jews, but he went into a country near the wilderness to a town called Ephraim, and he abode there with his disciples. [n. 1583]  

> ^11:55^ And the Pasch of the Jews was at hand, and many from the country went up to Jerusalem, in order to purify themselves. [n. 1586]

> ^11:56^ They were looking for Jesus, and they talked with one another standing in the temple: what do you think that he has not come to the festival day? [n. 1587]

> And the chief priests and Pharisees had given orders, that if any man knew where he was, he should tell, that they might apprehend him. [n. 1588]

> **1582**. Here the Evangelist sets down how Christ escaped from their malice:

first, the way he escaped;  

second, the effect this had on the people of making them question: ***and the Pasch of the Jews was at hand***.  

**1583**. The way he escaped was to hide himself and leave the presence of the Jews: for after their plan, he moved more cautiously and ***after this, Jesus did not walk openly among the Jews***. He did not withdraw to a populated city, but into a remote region, a ***country near the wilderness, to a town called Ephraim, and he abode there with his disciples***.  

**1584**. But did he lack the power by which, if he had wished, he could have lived publicly among the Jews and they would not do anything to him? Of course not. He did not do this because he did not have the power, but as an example for the disciples. This shows that it is not a sin if his faithful withdraw from the sight of their persecutors, choosing rather to evade the fury of the wicked by hiding, than kindle it more by showing themselves: *when they persecute you in one town, flee to the next* (Matt 10:23).  

Moreover, Origen says that no one should place himself in danger; but when dangers are immediately threatening, it is very praiseworthy not to run from professing Christ or not to refuse to suffer death for the sake of the truth. No one should place himself in danger for two reason. First, because it is very presumptuous to place oneself in danger, both on account of a lack of experience of one’s own virtue, which is sometimes found to be fragile, and on account of the uncertainty about the outcome; *let any one who thinks that he stands take heed lest he fall* (1 Cor 10:12). Second, lest by presenting ourselves to our persecutors, we give them the occasion to be more wicked and culpable: *give no offense to Jews or to Greeks or to the Church of God* (1 Cor 10:32).  

**1585**. Now the effect of his leaving, that the people questioned, is set down:  

first, the occasion for their questioning;  

second, their questioning;  

and third, the reason for their questioning.  

**1586**. Two occasions for their questioning and wondering are mentioned.  

The first was the nature of the time, because ***the Pasch of the Jews was at hand***, when the flight of the Hebrews out of Egypt was recalled: *it is the Lord’s Passover* (Exod 12:11). He adds, ***of the Jews***, because they celebrated their Passover in an unholy and unbecoming way: for when one celebrates the Passover in a devout way it is called the Passover of God: *your assemblies I will not abide* (Isa 1:13).  

The second occasion was gathering of the people, ***and many from the country went up to Jerusalem***. For as we see from Exodus, the children of Israel were to present themselves to the Lord three times a year on the three festivals, and the foremost of these was the Passover (Exod 23). And so a great number traveled to Jerusalem, where the temple was located.  

But because it was not yet actually the Paschal time, when they were obliged to go, the Evangelist tells why they went then, adding, ***in order to purify themselves***. For no one dared to eat the lamb if he was unclean, and so they went before the Passover so that, by purifying themselves in the meantime, they could fittingly eat the lamb on the Passover. This gives us an example that we should purify ourselves during Lent by fasts and good works, so that on the Passover we might receive the body of our Lord in a fitting manner.  

**1587**. The reason for their questioning is mentioned as due to Christ’s absence: ***they were looking for Jesus***, not to honor him, but to kill him, ***and they talked with one another standing in the temple: what do you think that he has not come to the festival day?***  

But note that when a festival day is celebrated in a holy manner, Christ is always present: *for where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of them* (Matt 18:20). And so let us, when we gather together in the house of God, seek Jesus by consoling each other and by praying that he come to our festival day. But Jesus does not come when a feast is not celebrated in a holy manner: *your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hates* (Isa 1:4).  

**1588**. He adds the reason for their questioning and for the absence of Jesus, saying, ***the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders, that if any man knew where he was***, that is, Jesus, ***he should tell, that they might apprehend him***, to kill him. ***You will seek me, and you will die in your sin*** (John 8:21).  

As Augustine says, we who know where Christ is, that is, at the right hand of the Father, should tell them so that they may truly apprehend him by faith.
