# Lecture 1 — Discovery of the resurrection

^20:1^ And on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalen came early, when it was still dark, to the sepulchre; and she saw the stone had been taken away from the sepulchre. [n. 2471]  

> ^20:2^ She ran, therefore, and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them: they have taken the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we do not know where they have laid him. [n. 2476]

> ^20:3^ Peter therefore went out, and that other disciple, and they came to the sepulchre. [n. 2477]

> ^20:4^ And they both ran together, and the other disciple outran Peter, and came to the sepulchre first. [n. 2478]

> ^20:5^ And when he stooped down, he saw the linen cloths lying there; but he did not go in. [n. 2480]

> ^20:6^ Then Simon Peter came, following him, and went into the sepulchre, and saw the linen cloths lying there, [n. 2482]

> ^20:7^ and the napkin that had been on his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but apart, wrapped up in one place. [n. 2483]

> ^20:8^ Then the other disciple also went in, who had come to the sepulchre first, and he saw, and believed. [n. 2486]

> ^20:9^ For as yet they did not know the Scripture, that he must rise again from the dead. [n. 2489]

> **2470**. Having related the mysteries of the passion of Christ, the Evangelist now speaks of the resurrection.

First, he says the resurrection was made known to certain women;  

second, to the disciples: ***now when it was late on that same day* **(John 20:19).  

The revelation of Christ’s resurrection to the women went in stages:  

first, there is the open tomb;  

second, the appearance of the angel: ***the disciples therefore went back to their homes* **(John 20:10);  

third, the sight of Christ: ***when she had said this, she turned around, and saw Jesus standing*** (John 20:14).  

In regard to the first,  

he first mentions the sight of the open tomb;  

second, this news is reported to the disciple: ***she ran, therefore, and came to Simon Peter***;  

and third, they see for themselves: ***Peter therefore went out***.  

**2471**. Four things can be noted about the first. First, the time; it was one day of the Sabbath, that is, ***the first day of the week***. The Jews considered the Sabbath as a very sacred day, and all the other days were described in reference to the Sabbath. Thus they spoke of the first day of the Sabbath, the second day of the Sabbath, and so on. Matthew speaks of the *first day of the Sabbath* (Matt 28:1). But John speaks of ***the first day of the week*** because he is referring to a mystery, for this day of the resurrection was the beginning of a new creation: *when you send forth your Spirit, they are created; and you renew the face of the ground* (Ps 104:30); *for neither circumcision counts for anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation* (Gal 6:15). In Genesis, when Moses is speaking of the first day of creasion, he does not say the first day, but he says *one day* (Gen 1:5). And so the Evangelist uses these words of Moses because he wants to express a newness.  

And also because this day begins the day of eternity, which is one day, no night interrupting it, because the sun which makes this day will never set. *And the city has no need of sun or moon to shine upon it, for the glory of God is its light, and its lamp is the Lamb* (Rev 21:23); *there will be one day, which is known to the Lord, not day and night, for at evening time there will be light* (Zech 14:7).  

**2472**. Second, the person who saw the tomb is given, ***Mary Magdalene came early, when it was still dark, to the sepulchre***.  

A question arises here because Mark makes mention of *Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome* (Mark 16:1); and Matthew also mentions *the other Mary* (Matt 28:1).  

According to Augustine the resolution is that Mary Magdalene was more ardent and more devoted to Christ than the other women. *(*Agreement Among the Evangelists* 3.24.)* Thus we read that *her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much* (Luke 7:47). And for this reason the Evangelist mentions her by name. This is also the reason why the Lord appeared to her first, *he appeared first to Mary Magdalene* (Mark 16:9); *she hastens to make herself known to those who desire her* (Wis 6:14).  

**2473**. Third, the time is given, ***early, when it was still dark***. Luke tells us that the women who had come with Christ from Galilee saw his tomb and how his body was laid, and they prepared spices and ointments for it (Luke 23:55). They rested on the Sabbath according to the commandment. As soon as the Sabbath was over, on the first day of the week, before daylight, she came to the tomb, incited by her exceedingly great love, *its flashes*, the flashes of love, *are flashes of fire* (Song 8:6).  

**2474**. The question arises why Mark says *very early, after the sun had risen* (Mark 16:2), while the Evangelist says, ***when it was still dark***.  

The answer is that what Mark says should be understood as referring to the breaking of the day, so that the sun had risen, not that it had appeared above the earth, but that it approached our region.  

**2475**. Fourth, we are told what Mary saw, she ***saw the stone had been taken away from the sepulchre***. This was a sign that either someone had taken Christ away, or that he had arisen. When Matthew says that *an angel of the Lord descended from heaven and came and rolled back the stone*, we should not think the stone was rolled away before Christ arose, but only after (Matt 28:2). For since Christ came forth from the closed womb of the Virgin even though his body was not glorified, it is not surprising if he passed through the tomb with his glorified body. The stone was taken away so that people could see that Christ was not there, and more easily believe in his resurrection.  

**2476**. Next the Evangelist mentions that ***she ran, therefore and came to Simon Peter***, and the events of this vision were announced. Because of Mary’s exceeding love she could not delay telling what she had seen to the disciples, ***she ran, therefore, and came to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved***: *this day is a day of good news; if we are silent and wait until the morning light, punishment will overtake us* (2 Kgs 7:9). And so one who hears the words of God should tell it to others without delay: *let him who hears say: come* (Rev 22:17). Mary came to those who were more important and who loved Christ more ardently, so that they might either look for Jesus with her or share her sorrow.  

She said to them, ***they have taken the Lord out of the sepulchre***. Mary saw the empty tomb, and not yet having it in her heart that Christ had risen, she said, ***and we do not know where they have laid him***. We can see from this that Mary had not been alone at the tomb, and that she still had doubts about the resurrection. So it was not without reason that the Evangelist wrote that ***it was still dark***, for this indicated the condition of their minds, in which there was the darkness of doubt: *they have neither knowledge nor understanding, they walk about in darkness* (Ps 82:5).  

Note that in the Greek manuscripts it reads, ***my Lord***, which shows the impetus of her love and her affectionate devotion: *whom have I in heaven but you? And there is nothing upon earth that I desire besides you . . . God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever* (Ps 73:25).  

**2477**. The Evangelist next shows how this was investigated: ***Peter therefore went out, and that other disciple***. First, he indicates the eagerness with which Peter and John acted, for they left the place where they were and ***Peter, therefore, went out and that other disciple***. Those who want to look into the mysteries of Christ have in a sense to come out from themselves and from their carnal way of living: *come out, O daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon* (Song 3:11).  

**2478**. Second, we see the details of their search. First, it is said that they ran. ***They both ran***, they who loved Christ more than the others: *I will run in the way of your commandments* (Ps 119:32); *so run that you may obtain it*, the prize (1 Cor 9:25).  

**2479**. Second, we see how the disciples arrived, ***the other disciple outran Peter***.  

John arrived first,  

and Peter followed: ***then Simon Peter came, following him***.  

**2480**. It is not without reason that the Evangelist is careful to tell us the smallest details. For these two disciples signify two peoples, the Jews and the gentiles. Although the Jews were the first to have knowledge of the one true God, the gentiles were an older people, because even the Jews originated from the gentiles: *go from your country and your kindred* (Gen 12:1). These two people were both running over the course of this world: the Jews using the written law, the gentiles using the law of nature. Or, they were both running by their natural desire for happiness and for a knowledge of the truth, which all men desire to know by their very nature. ***The other disciple***, that is, the younger one, ***outran Peter***, because the gentiles came to a knowledge of the truth more slowly than the Jews, since formerly God was known only in Judea. So the Psalm says, *he has not dealt thus with any other nation* (Ps 147:20). ***And came to the sepulchre first***, because he first considered the mysteries of Christ, as it was first to the Jews that the promise of Christ was made, *to whom belongs the adoption as of children, and the glory, and the testament, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises: whose are the fathers, and of whom is Christ, according to the flesh, who is over all things* (Rom 9:4–5).  

***And when he stooped down, he saw the linen cloths lying there; but he did not go in. He stooped***, under the yoke of the law, *all that the Lord has spoken we will do* (Exod 24:7), ***he saw the linen cloths lying there***, that is, the figures or foreshadowings of all the mysteries, *but their minds were hardened; for to this day, when they read the Old Covenant, that same veil remains uplifted* (2 Cor 3:14). ***But he did not go in***, for as long as he was unwilling to believe in the one who was dead he had not yet come to the knowledge of the truth. Another who did not go in was the brother of the prodigal son, for when he heard the celebrations, the music and the dancing, *he refused to go in* (Luke 15:28). Nevertheless, David promised that they would enter: *I will go to the altar of God* (Ps 43:4).  

**2481**. Now the Evangelist recounts the arrival of Peter. As for the literal meaning, the fact that they ran together was a sign of their passionate devotion. John arrived first because he was a younger man than Peter.  

But considering the mystical sense, Peter follows John because the gentiles who were converted to Christ were not joined to another church different from the church of the Jews, but were grafted on to the already existing olive tree and Church. The Apostle praises them saying, *for you brethren, became imitators of the churches of God in Christ Jesus which are in Judea* (1 Thess 2:14).  

**2482**. Third, we see the order in which they entered: ***and went into the sepulchre***,  

Peter first,  

and then John: ***then the other disciple also went in***.  

**2483**. The Evangelist says that Peter entered the tomb. According to the literal meaning, although John arrived first, he did not enter because of his respect for Peter. But considering the mystical interpretation, this signifies that the Jewish people, who were the first to hear of the mysteries of the incarnation, would be converted to the faith after the gentiles: *that gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness have attained it . . . but that Israel who pursued the righteousness which is based in law did not succeed in fulfilling that law* (Rom 9:30).  

John saw only the linen cloths. Peter also ***saw the linen cloths lying there*** because we do not reject the Old Testament, for as Luke says, *then he opened their minds to understand the Scriptures* (Luke 24:45).  

But in addition Peter saw ***the napkin which had been on his head***: *the head of Christ is God* (1 Cor 11:3). Thus to see the napkin which had been on the head of Jesus is to have faith in the divinity of Christ, which the Jews refused to accept. This napkin is described as ***not lying with the linen cloths, but apart, wrapped up in one place***, because the divinity of Christ is covered over, and it is apart from every creature because of its excellence: *God who is over all be blessed for ever* (Rom 9:5); *truly, you are a God who hides yourself* (Isa 45:15). He saw the napkin ***wrapped up***, to form a circle. And when linen is rolled this way one can not see its beginning or end, for the eminence of the divinity neither begins nor ends: *Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever* (Heb 13:8); *you are the same, and your years have no end* (Ps 102:27). The napkin was in one place, ***apart***, because God does not dwell where minds are divided; those who merit his grace are those who are one in charity: *his place is in peace* (Ps 76:2); *for God is not a God of confusion but of peace* (1 Cor 14:33).  

**2484**. Or, in another interpretation, the napkin, which workers use to wipe the sweat off their faces can be understood to indicate the labor of God. For while God always remains tranquil, he presents himself as laboring and burdened when he endures the stubborn depravity of mankind: *they have become a burden to me, I am weary of bearing them* (Isa 1:14). Christ took on this burden in a special way when he took on a human nature: *let him give his cheek to the smiter, and be filled with insults* (Lam 3:30).  

This napkin is found separate and apart from the other cloths because the sufferings of our Redeemer are far apart and separate from our sufferings. The other linen cloths, which are related to the members of the body as the napkin is to the head, indicate the sufferings of the saints, which are separate from the napkin, that is, the sufferings of Christ, for Christ suffered without fault what we suffer because of our faults: *for Christ also died . . . the righteous for the unrighteous* (1 Pet 3:18). He went to his death willingly: ***no man takes it away from me, but I lay it down of myself*** (John 10:18); *Christ loved us and gave himself up for us* (Eph 5:2), while the saints go to their death reluctantly, ***another will gird you and lead you where you do not want*** (John 21:18).  

**2485**. Why was the Evangelist so careful to mention all these details?  

Chrysostom says this was done to counter the false rumor spread by the Jews that the body of Christ had been secretly taken away (Matt 28:13). *(*Commentary on Saint John* 85.4.)* For if Christ’s body had been stolen away as they said, the disciples would surely not have removed the wrappings, especially since they had to work fast because the guards were near. Nor would they be so careful to lift off the napkin and roll it up and place it in a separate place. They would simply have taken the body as they found it. This was why he allowed himself to be buried with myrrh and aloes, because they glue the cloths to the body so that they cannot be quickly removed.  

**2486**. When the Evangelist says, ***then the other disciple also went in, he who had come to the sepulchre first***, he tells of John’s entrance. John did not remain outside but entered after Peter, because when the world is ending, the Jews will also be gathered into the faith: *a hardening has come upon part of Israel, until the full number of the gentiles come in, and so all Israel will be saved* (Rom 11:25); *a remnant will be saved* (Isa 10:21).  

**2487**. Or, another interpretation, in the mystical sense. These two disciples stand for two kinds of people; John represents those who are devoted to the contemplation of truth, and Peter stands for those whose main interest is to carry out the commandments. In fact, Simon means obedient.  

Now it very often happens that contemplatives, because they are docile, are the first to become acquainted with a knowledge of the mysteries of Christ, but they do not enter, for sometimes there is knowledge, but little or no love follows. While those in the active life, because of their continuing fervor and earnestness, even though they are slower to understand, *by your commandments I have had understanding* (Ps 118:104), enter into them more quickly, so that those who are later to arrive, are the first to penetrate the divine mysteries: *so the last will be first, and the first last* (Matt 20:16).  

**2488**. Next when he says, ***he saw, and believed***, we see the effect of the investigation. At first glance it seems to mean that ***he saw*** the situation ***and believed*** that Christ had arisen. But according to Augustine this is not correct, because the next thing the Evangelist says is, ***for as yet they did not know the Scripture, that he must rise again from the dead***. *(*Tractates on the Gospel of John* 120.9.)* Therefore, one must say that ***he saw*** the empty tomb ***and believed*** what the woman had said, which is that someone had taken the Lord. Then we read, ***for as yet they did not know the Scripture***, because the meaning of the Scripture was not yet opened to them so they could understand it (Luke 24:45).  

But certainly Christ had foretold his passion and resurrection? *I will rise on the third day* (Matt 20:19).  

I answer that we should say that in keeping with the way they heard his parables, they failed here also to understand many things which he had said plainly, thinking that he meant something else.  

**2489**. Or, according to Chrysostom’s understanding, ***he saw*** the linen cloths so folded and arranged which would not have been the case if the body had been furtively snatched away; *(*Commentary on Saint John* 85.4.)* ***and believed***, with a true faith, that Christ had risen from the dead. What follows, ***for as yet they did not know the Scripture***, refers to the statement, ***he saw and believed***. It was like saying: before he saw these things he did not understand the Scripture ***that he must rise again from the dead***; but when he saw he believed that he had risen from the dead.
