# Lecture 6 — Epilogue

^21:24^ This is the disciple who gives testimony of these things, and has written these things; and we know that his testimony is true. [n. 2653]  

> ^21:25^ But there are also many other things which Jesus did; which, if every one of them were to be written, the world itself, I think, would not be able to contain the books that should be written. [n. 2657]

> **2652**. Now we have the last part of this Gospel, which is like an epilogue.

First, the Gospel is commended;  

and then the vastness of the subject treated: ***but there are also many other things which Jesus did***.  

The Gospel is commended because of two things:  

its author,  

and its truth, ***and we know that his testimony is true***.  

Three things are mentioned about the author.  

**2653**. First, there is the authority of the author, because ***this is the disciple***, understanding what was mentioned before who was loved above the others, intimate with Christ, able to question him with confidence, and to whom it was granted to remain ***till I come***. All these things refer to the authority of the author.  

John is said to have been loved more than the others because of his unique charity: ***by this will all men know that you are my disciples, if you have love one for another*** (John 13:35). None of the other apostles speak so much of love for others as does John in his letters. We also read that as an old man he was carried to the church by his followers to teach the faithful. He taught only one thing: *little children, love one another*. This is the perfection of the Christian life.  

**2654**. Second, John’s office is mentioned, which was to give testimony, for he says, ***who gives testimony of these things***. This is the special office of apostles: *you will be my witnesses* (Acts 1:8); *you are my witnesses!* (Isa 44:8).  

**2655**. Third, he refers to his zeal when he says, ***and has written these things***. As an apostle he testified to the actions of Christ to those who were present; and in his zeal he recorded these actions in writing for those who were not with him and were to come after him: *take a large tablet and write upon it in common characters* (Isa 8:1); *the wisdom of the scribe depends on the opportunity of leisure; and he who has little business may become wise* (Sir 38:24).  

For it was granted to John to live until the time when the Church was at peace; and this is the time when he wrote all these things. John mentions such things so that we will not think that his Gospel has less authority than the other three, seeing that he wrote after the death of all the other apostles, and that the other Gospels, especially that of Matthew, had been approved by them.  

**2656**. Now John states that his Gospel is true, and he speaks in the person of the entire Church which received it: *my mouth will utter truth* (Prov 8:7).  

Note that although many have written about universal truth, there is a difference among them: those who wrote the canonical Scriptures, such as the evangelists and apostles and the like, so constantly and firmly affirm this truth that it cannot be doubted. Thus John says, ***we know that his testimony is true***: *if any one is preaching to you a gospel contrary to that which you received, let him be accursed* (Gal 1:9). The reason for this is that only the canonical Scriptures are the standard of faith. Others have set forth this truth but in such a way that they do not want to be believed except in those things in which they say what is true.  

**2657**. Now John states that his Gospel is incomplete as compared with the reality, as if to downplay what he had written in order to hand over the glory to the one who loved him, because Christ not only did these things ***but there are also many other things which Jesus did***.  

**2658**. His statement, ***if every one of them were to be written, I suppose that the world itself could not contain the books that should be written***, can be understood in two ways. First, the word ***contain*** can refer to the capacity of our minds to understand. So the meaning is: so much could be said about Christ that the world could not understand all that could be written: ***I have yet many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now***, that is, understand them (John 16:12).  

We could also regard this statement as a deliberate exaggeration; and it then indicates the abundance of Christ’s works.  

**2659**. How can we reconcile this? He had just said, ***we know that his testimony is true***, and then immediately resorts to hyperbole, exceeding the truth. According to Augustine, Scripture does use figures of speech, such as *I saw the Lord seated on a high and lofty throne* (Isa 6:1), and such statements are not false. *(*Tractates on the Gospel of John* 124.8.)* This is so when hyperbole is used. The desire of the speaker is not that we accept the literal meaning of the words, but what they were intended to mean, that is, the great number of Christ’s works. Hyperbole is not used to explain what is obscure or doubtful, but to exaggerate or minimize what is obvious. For example, to emphasize how plentiful something is, one can say that there is enough for a hundred or a thousand people. And to minimize something, one could say that there is hardly enough for three. This is not speaking falsely, because it is so obvious that the words contort the reality that they show that one does not intend to lie, but to indicate that something is great or small.  

**2660**. Or, this statement could be understood to refer to the power of Christ, who performed these signs; and the emphasis is on ***every one of them***. For to write about each and every word and deed of Christ is to reveal the power of every word and deed. Now the words and deeds of Christ are also those of God. Thus, if one tried to write and tell of the nature of every one, he could not do so; indeed, the entire world could not do this. This is because even an infinite number of human words cannot equal one word of God. From the beginning of the Church, Christ has been written about; but this is still not equal to the subject. Indeed, even if the world lasted a hundred thousand years and books were written about Christ, his words and deeds could not be completely revealed: *of making many books there is no end* (Eccl 12:12); the works of God *are multiplied above number* (Ps 40:5).
