# Chapter 1 · Lecture 4

9. And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan.  

> 10. And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him:

> 11. And there came a voice from heaven, saying, "Thou art My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

> **Pseudo-Jerome**: Mark the Evangelist, like a hart, longing after the fountains of water, leaps forward over places, smooth and steep; and, as a bee laden with honey, he sips the tops of the flowers. Wherefore he hath shewn us in his narrative Jesus coming from Nazareth, saying, *and it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan*.

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant. e Cat. in Marc.: Forasmuch as He was ordaining a new baptism, He came to the baptism of John, which, in respect of His own baptism, was incomplete, but different from the Jewish baptism, as being between both. He did this that He might shew, by the nature of His baptism, that He was not baptized for the remission of sins, nor as wanting the reception of the Holy Ghost: for the baptism of John was destitute of both these. But He was baptized that He might be made known to all, that they might believe on Him and *fulfil all righteousness*, which is *keeping of the commandments*: for it has been commanded to men that they should submit to the Prophet's baptism.  

**Bede**, in Marc., i, 4: He was baptized, that by being baptized Himself He might shew His approval of John's baptism [ed. note: vol i, pl 109, note h], and that, by sanctifying the waters of Jordan through the descent of the dove, He might shew the coming of the Holy Ghost in the laver of believers. Whence there follows, *and straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Holy Spirit like a dove descending, and resting upon him*. But the heavens are opened, not by the unclosing of the elements, but to the eyes of the spirit, to which Ezekiel in the beginning of his book relates that they were opened; or that His seeing the heavens opened after baptism was done for our sakes, to whom the door of the kingdom of heaven is opened by the laver of regeneration.  

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant. e Cat. in Marc.: Or else, that from heaven sanctification might be given to men, and earthly things be joined to heavenly. But the Holy Spirit is said to have descended upon Him, not as if He then first came to Him, for He never had left Him; but that He might shew forth the Christ, Who was preached by John, and point Him out to all, as it were by the finger of faith.  

**Bede**: This event also, in which the Holy Ghost was seen to come down upon baptism, was a sign of spiritual grace to be given to us in baptism.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: But this is the anointing of Christ according to [p. 16] the flesh, namely, the Holy Ghost, of which anointing it is said, *God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows* (Ps 45:7).  

**Bede**: Well indeed in the shape of a dove did the Holy Ghost come down, for it is an animal of great simplicity, and far removed from the malice of gall, that in a figure He might shew us that He looks out for simple hearts, and deigns not to dwell in the minds of the wicked.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Again, the Holy Ghost came down in the shape of a dove, because in the Canticles it is sung of the Church: *my bride, my love, my beloved, my dove*. *Bride* in the Patriarchs, *love* in the Prophets, *near of kin* in Joseph and Mary, *beloved* in John the Baptist, *dove* in Christ and His Apostles: to whom it is said, *be ye wise as serpents, and harmless as doves* (Matt 10:16).  

Bede: Now the Dove sat on the head of Jesus, lest any one should think that the voice of the Father was addressed to John and not to Christ. And well did he add, "abiding on Him;" for this is peculiar to Christ, that the Holy Ghost once filling Him should never leave Him. For sometimes to His faithful disciples the grace of the Spirit is conferred for signs of virtue, and for the working of miracles, sometimes it is taken away; though for the working of piety and righteousness, for the preservation of love to God and to one's neighbour, the grace of the Spirit is never absent. But the voice of the Father shewed that He Himself, who came to John to be baptized with the other, was the very Son of God, willing to baptize with the Holy Spirit, whence there follows, "And there came a voice from heaven, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased." Not that this informed the Son Himself of a thing of which He was ignorant, but it shews to us what we ought to believe.  

**Augustine**, de Con. Ev., ii, 14: Wherefore Matthew relates that the voice said, *this is my beloved Son*; for he wished to shew that the words, *this is My Son*, were in fact said, that thus the persons who heard it might know that He, and not another, was the Son of God. But if you ask which of these two sounded forth in that voice, take which you will, only remember, that the Evangelists, though not relating the same form of speaking, relate the same meaning. And that God delighted Himself in His Son, we are reminded in these words, *in thee I am well pleased*.  

**Bede**: The same voice has taught us, that we also, by the water of cleansing, and by the Spirit of sanctification, may be made the sons of God. The mystery of the Trinity also is shewn forth in the baptism; the Son is baptized, the Spirit comes down in the shape of a dove, the voice of the Father bearing witness to the Son is heard.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Morally also it may be interpreted; we also, drawn aside from the fleeting world by the smell and purity of flowers, run with the young maidens after the bridegroom, and are washed in the sacrament of baptism, from the two fountains of the love of God, and of our neighbour, by the grace of remission, and mounting up by hope gaze upon heavenly mysteries with the eyes of a clean heart. Then we receive in a contrite and lowly spirit, with simplicity of heart, the Holy Spirit, who comes down to the meek, and abides in us, by the never-failing charity. And the voice of the Lord from heaven is directed to us the beloved of God; *blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God* (Matt. 5:9) and then the Father, with the Son and the Holy Spirit, is well-pleased with us, when we are made one spirit with God.
