# Chapter 1 · Lecture 8

21. And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day He entered into the synagogue, and taught.  

> 22. And they were astonished as His doctrine: for He taught them as one that had authority, and not as the Scribes.

> **Pseudo-Jerome**: Mark, arranging the sayings of the Gospel as they were in his own mind, not in themselves, quits the order of the history, and follows the order of the mysteries. Wherefore he relates the first miracle on the sabbath day, saying, *and they went into Capernaum*.

**Theophylact**: Quitting Nazareth. Now on the sabbath day, when the Scribes were gathered together, He entered into a synagogue, and taught. Wherefore there follows, *and straightway on the sabbath day, having entered into the synagogue, He taught them*. For this end the Law commanded them to give themselves up to rest on the sabbath day, that they might meet together to attend to sacred reading. Again, Christ taught them by rebuke, not by flattery as did the Pharisees; wherefore it says, *and they were astonished at His doctrine; for He taught them as one having power, and not as the Scribes*. He taught them also in power, transforming men to good, and He threatened punishment to those who did not believe on Him.  

**Bede**: The Scribes themselves taught the people what was written in Moses and the Prophets; but Jesus as the God and Lord of Moses, himself, by the freedom of His own will, either added those things which appeared wanting in the Law, or altered things as He preached to the people; as we read in Matthew, *it was said to them of old time, but I say unto you* (Matt 5:27).
