# Chapter 1 · Lecture 6

14. Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God,  

> 15. And saying, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the Gospel."

> **Pseudo-Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant. e Cat. in Marc.: The Evangelist Mark follows Matthew in his order, and therefore after having said that Angels minister, he subjoins, *but after that John was put into prison, Jesus came into Galilee*. After the temptation and the ministry of Angels, He goes back into Galilee, teaching us not to resist the violence of evil men.

**Theophylact**: And to shew us that in persecutions we ought to retire, and not to await them; but when we fall into them, we must sustain them.  

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant. e Cat. in Marc.: He retired also that He might keep Himself for teaching and for healing, before He suffered, and after fulfilling all these things, might become obedient unto death.  

Bede: John being put in prison, fitly does the Lord begin to preach: wherefore there follows, "Preaching the Gospel, &c." For when the Law ceases, the Gospel arises in its steps. [p. 20]  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: When the shadow ceases, the truth comes on; first, John in prison, the Law in Judaea; then, Jesus in Galilee, Paul among the Gentiles preaching the Gospel of the kingdom. For to an earthly kingdom succeeds poverty, to the poverty of Christians is given an everlasting kingdom; but earthly honour is like the foam of water, or smoke, or sleep.  

**Bede**: Let no one, however, suppose that the putting of John in prison took place immediately after the forty days' temptation and the fast of the Lord; for whosoever reads the Gospel of John will find, that the Lord taught many things before the putting of John in prison, and also did many miracles; for you have in his Gospel, *this beginning of miracles did Jesus* (John 2:11) and afterwards, *for John was not yet cast into prison* (John 3:24). Now it is said that when John read the books of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, he approved indeed the text of the history, and affirmed that they had spoken truth, but said that they had composed the history of only one year after John was cast into prison, in which year also he suffered. Passing over then the year of which the transactions had been published by the three others, he related the events of the former period, before John was cast into prison. When therefore Mark had said that *Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom*, he subjoins, *saying, Since the time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand*.  

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**, vict. Ant. Cat. in Marc.: Since then the time was fulfilled, *when the fulness of times was come, and God sent His son*, it was fitting that the race of man should obtain the last dispensation of God. And therefore he says, *for the kingdom of heaven is at hand*.  

Origen, in Matt., tom. x, 14: But the kingdom of God is essentially the same as the kingdom of heaven, though they differ in idea. [ed. note: see Origen, de Orat. 25, 26 in Matt. t 12.14 (?)] For by the kingdom of God is to be understood that in which God reigns; and this in truth is in the region of the living, where, seeing God face to face, they will abide in the good things now promised to them; whether by this region one chooses to understand Love, or some other confirmation [ed. note: By 'confirmation,' seems to be meant the perfecting of spiritual natures; see Thomas Aq., Summa Theologica, part 1, Q62, Art 1. It answers to (greek word) as used by St. Basil; de Sp. S 16] of those who put on the likeness of things [p. 21] above, which are signified by the heavens. [ed. note: "Coeli" is commonly interpreted of the Angels, by the Fathers.] For it is clear [ed. note: see Chrys., in Matt., Hom. 19 in c. 6,9] enough that the kingdom of God is confined neither by place nor by time.  

**Theophylact**: Or else, the Lord means that the time of the Law is complete; as if He said, Up to this time the Law was at work; from this time the kingdom of God will work, that is, a conversation according to the Gospel, which is with reason likened to the kingdom of heaven. For when you see a man clothed in flesh living according to the Gospel, do you not say that he has the kingdom of heaven, which *is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost?* (Rom 14:17). The next word is, *repent*.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: For he must repent, who would keep close to eternal good, that is, to the kingdom of God. For he who would have the kernel, breaks the shell; the sweetness of the apple makes up for the bitterness of its root; the hope of gain makes the dangers of the sea pleasant; the hope of health takes away from the painfulness of medicine. They are able worthily to proclaim the preaching of Christ who have deserved to attain to the reward of forgiveness; and therefore after He has said, *repent,* He subjoins, *and believe the Gospel*. For unless ye have believed, ye shall not understand.  

Bede: *Repent*, therefore, *and believe*; that is, renounce dead works; for of what use is believing without good works? The merit of good works does not, however, bring to faith, but faith begins, that good works may follow.
