# Chapter 4 · Lecture 4

30. And He said, "Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it?  

> 31. It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth:

> 32. But when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it."

> 33. And with many such parable spake He the word unto them, as they were able to hear it. [p. 84]

> 34. But without a parable spake He not unto them: and when they were alone, He expounded all things to His disciples.

> **Gloss**: After having narrated the parable concerning the coming forth of the fruit from the seed of the Gospel, he here subjoins another parable, to shew the excellence of the doctrine of the Gospel before all other doctrines. Wherefore it is said, *and He said, Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom  of God?*

**Theophylact**: Most brief indeed is the word of faith; Believe in God, and thou shalt be saved. But the preaching of it has been spread far and wide over the earth, and increased so, that the birds of heaven, that is, contemplative men, sublime in understanding and knowledge, dwell under it. For how many wise men among the Gentiles, quitting their wisdom, have found rest in the preaching of the Gospel! Its preaching then is greater than all.  

**Chrysostom**: And also because the wisdom spoken amongst the perfect expands, to an extent greater than all other sayings, that which was told to men in short discourses, for there is nothing greater than this truth.  

**Theophylact**: Again, it put forth great boughs, for the Apostles were divided off as the boughs of a tree, some to Rome, some to India, some to other parts of the world.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Or else, that seed is very small in fear, but great when it has grown into charity, which is greater than all herbs: for *God is love* (1 John 4:1), whilst *all flesh is grass* (Isa 40:6). But the boughs which it puts forth are those of mercy and compassion, since under its shade the poor of Christ, who are meant by the living creatures of the heavens, delight to dwell.  

**Bede**: Again, the man who sows is by many taken to mean the Saviour Himself, by others, man himself sowing in his own heart.  

**Chrysostom**: Then after this, Mark, who delights in brevity, to shew the nature of the parables, subjoins, *and with many such parables spake He the word unto them as they could hear Him*.  

**Theophylact**: For since the multitude was unlearned, He instructs them from objects of food and familiar names, and for this reason he adds, *but without a parable spake He not unto them*, that is, in order that they might be induced to approach and to ask Him. It goes on, *and when they were alone, He expounded all things to His disciples*, that is, all things about which they were ignorant and asked Him, not simply all, whether obscure or not.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: For they were worthy to hear mysteries apart, in the most secret haunt of wisdom, for they were men, who, removed from the crowds of evil thoughts, remained in the solitude of virtue; and wisdom is received in a time of quiet.
