# Chapter 5 · Lecture 3

35. While He yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house certain which said, "Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further?"  

> 36. As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, He saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, "Be not afraid, only believe."

> 37. And He suffered no man to follow Him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.

> 38. And He cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.

> 39. And when He was come in, He saith unto them, "Why make ye this ado, and weep? The damsel is not dead, but sleepeth."

> 40. And they laughed Him to scorn. But when He had put them all out, He taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with Him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying. [p. 101]

> 41. And He took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, "Talitha cumi;" which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, arise.

> 42. And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of the age of twelve years. And they were astonished with a great astonishment.

> 43. And He charged them straitly that no man should know it; and commanded that something should be given her to eat.

> **Theophylact**: Those who were about the ruler of the synagogue, thought that Christ was one of the prophets, and for this reason they thought that they should beg of Him to come and pray over the damsel. But because she had already expired, they thought that He ought not to be asked to do so. Therefore it is said, *while He yet spake, there came messengers to the ruler of the synagogue, which said, Thy daughter is dead; why troublest thou the Master any further?* But the Lord Himself persuades the father to have confidence. For it goes on, *as soon as Jesus heard the word which was spoken, He saith to the ruler of the synagogu:, Be not afraid; only believe*.

**Augustine**: It is not said that he assented to his friends who brought the tidings and wished to prevent the Master from coming, so that our Lord's saying, *fear not, only believe*, is not a rebuke for his want of faith, but was intended to strengthen the belief which he had already. But if the Evangelist had related, that the ruler of the synagogue joined the friends who came from his house, in saying that Jesus should not be troubled, the words which Matthew relates him to have said, namely, that the damsel was dead, would then have been contrary to what was in his mind. It goes on, *and He suffered no man to follow Him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James*.  

**Theophylact**: For Christ in His lowliness would not do any thing for display. It goes on, *and He cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly*.  

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant. e Cat. in Marc.: But He Himself commands them not to wail, as if the damsel was not dead, [p. 102] but sleeping. Wherefore it says, *and when He was come in, He saith unto them: Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth*.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: It was told the ruler of the synagogue, Thy daughter is dead. But Jesus said to him, She is not dead, but sleepeth. Both are true, for the meaning is, She is dead to you, but to Me she is asleep.  

**Bede**: For to men she was dead, who were unable to raise her up; but to God she was asleep, in whose purpose both the soul was living, and the flesh was resting, to rise again. Whence it became a custom amongst Christians, that the dead, who, they doubt not, will rise again, should be said to sleep. It goes on, *and they laughed Him to scorn*.  

**Theophylact**: But they laugh at Him, as if unable to do any thing farther; and in this He convicts them of bearing witness involuntarily, that she was really dead whom He raised up, and therefore, that it would be a miracle if He raised her.  

**Bede**: Because they chose rather to laugh at than to believe in this saying concerning her resurrection, they are deservedly excluded from the place, as unworthy to witness His power in raising her, and the mystery of her rising. Wherefore it goes on, *but when He had put them all out, He taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with Him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying*.  

**Chrysostom**: Or else, to take away all display, He suffered not all to be with Him; that, however, He might leave behind Him witnesses of His divine power, He chose His three chief disciples and the father and mother of the damsel, as being necessary above all. And He restores life to the damsel both by His hand, and by word of mouth. Wherefore it says, *and He took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her: Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted: Damsel, I say unto thee, Arise*. For the hand of Jesus, having a quickening power, quickens the dead body, and His voice raises her as she is lying. Wherefore it follows, *and straightway the damsel arose and walked*.  

**Jerome**, Hier. ad Pam., Ep. 57: Some one may accuse the Evangelist of a falsehood in his explanation, in that he had added, *I say unto thee*, when in Hebrew, *Talitha cumi* only means, *damsel, arise*; but He adds, *I say unto thee, Arise*, to express that His meaning was to call and command her. It goes on, *for she was of the age of twelve years*.  

**Gloss**: The Evangelist added this, [p. 103] to shew that she was of an age to walk. By her walking, she is shewn to have been not only raised up, but also perfectly cured. It continues, *and they were astonished with a great astonishment*.  

**Chrysostom**, Hom. in Matt., 81: To shew that He had raised her really, and not only to the eye of fancy.  

**Bede**: Mystically; the woman was cured of a bloody flux, and immediately after the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue is reported to be dead, because as soon as the Church of the Gentiles is washed from the stain of vice, and called daughter by the merits of her faith, at once the synagogue is broken up on account of its zealous treachery and envy; treachery, because it did not choose to believe in Christ; envy, because it was vexed at the faith of the Church. What the messengers told the ruler of the synagogue, "Why troublest thou the Master any more," is said by those in this day who, seeing the state of the synagogue, deserted by God, believe that it cannot be restored, and therefore think that we are not to pray that it should be restored. But if the ruler of the synagogue, that is, the assembly of the teachers of the Law, determine to believe, the synagogue also, which is subjected to them, will be saved. Further, because the synagogue lost the joy of having Christ to dwell in it, as its faithlessness deserved, it lies dead as it were, amongst persons weeping and wailing. Again, our Lord raised the damsel by taking hold of her hand, because the hands of the Jews, which are full of blood, must first be cleansed, else the synagogue, which is dead, cannot rise again. But in the woman with the bloody flux, and the raising of the damsel, is shewn the salvation of the human race, which was so ordered by the Lord, that first some from Judaea, then the fulness of the Gentiles, might come in, and so all Israel might be saved. Again, the damsel was twelve years old, and the woman had suffered for twelve years, because the sinning of unbelievers was contemporary with the beginning of the faith of believers. Wherefore it is said, "Abraham believed on God, and it was counted to him for righteousness." [Gen 15:6] [ed. note: Bede's own words are rather more clear than those in the Catena: "That is, the woman began to be afflicted at the same time as the damsel was born; for nearly at the same period of the world the synagogue began to arise amongst the patriarchs, and the race of Gentiles throughout the world to be polluted with idolatry."] [p. 104]  

**Gregory**, Mor. 4, 27: Morally again, our Redeemer raised the damsel in the house, the young man without the gate, Lazarus in the tomb; he still lies dead in the house, whose sin is concealed; he is carried without the gate, whose sin has broken forth into the madness of an open deed; he lies crushed under the mound of the tomb, who in the commission of sin, lies powerless beneath the weight of habit.  

**Bede**: And we may remark, that lighter and daily errors may be cured by the remedy of a lighter penance. Wherefore the Lord raises the damsel, lying in the inner chamber with a very easy cry, saying, *damsel, arise*; but that he who had been four days dead might quit the prison of the tomb, He groaned in spirit, He was troubled, He shed tears. In proportion, then, as the death of the soul presses the more heavily, so much the more ardently must the fervour of the penitent press forward. But this too must be observed, that a public crime requires a public reparation; wherefore Lazarus, when called from the sepulchre, was placed before the eyes of the people: but slight sins require to be washed out by a secret penance, wherefore the damsel lying in the house is raised up before few witnesses, and those are desired to tell no man. The crowd also is cast out before the damsel is raised; for if a crowd of worldly thoughts be not first cast out from the hidden parts of the heart, the soul, which lies dead within, cannot rise. Well too did she arise and walk, for the soul, raised from sin, ought not only to rise from the filth of its crimes, but also to make advances in good works, and soon it is necessary that it should be filled with heavenly bread, that is, made partaker of the Divine Word, and of the Altar.
