# Chapter 5 · Lecture 2

21. And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto Him: and He was nigh unto the sea.  

> 22. And, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw Him, he fell at His feet,

> 23. And besought Him greatly, saying, "My little daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thee, come and lay Thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall live."

> 24. And Jesus went with him; and much people followed Him, and thronged Him.

> 25. And a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years,

> 26. And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse,

> 27. When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched His garment.

> 28. For she said, "If I may touch but His clothes, I shall be whole."

> 29. And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.

> 30. And Jesus, immediately knowing in Himself that virtue had gone out of Him, turned Him about in the press, and said, "Who touched My clothes?"

> 31. And His disciples said unto Him, "Thou seest the multitude thronging Thee, and saying Thou, 'Who touched Me?' "

> 32. And He looked round about to see her that had done this thing.

> 33. But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before Him, and told Him all the truth.

> 34. And He said unto her, "Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague." [p. 97]

> **Theophylact**: After the miracle of the demoniac, the Lord works another miracle, namely, in raising up the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue; the Evangelist, before narrating this miracle, says, *and when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto Him*.

**Augustine**, de Con. Evan., 2, 28: But we must understand, that what is added of the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue, took place when Jesus had again crossed the sea in a ship, though how long after does not appear; for if there were not an interval, there could be no time for the taking place of that which Matthew relates, concerning the feast at his own house; after which event, nothing follows immediately, except this concerning the daughter of the chief of the synagogue. For he has so put it together, that the transition itself shews that the narrative follows the order of time. It goes on, *there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, **Jairus by name*.  

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant. e Cat. in Marc.: He has recorded the name on account of the Jews of that time, that it might mark the miracle. It goes on, *and when he saw Him, he fell at His feet, and besought Him greatly, **saying: My little daughter lieth at the point of death*. Matthew indeed relates that the chief of the synagogue reported that his daughter was dead, but Mark says that she was very sick, and that afterwards it was told to the ruler of the synagogue, when our Lord was about to go with him, that she was dead. The fact then, which Matthew implies, is the same, namely, that He raised her from the dead; and it is for the sake of brevity, that he says that she was dead, which was evident from her being raised.  

**Augustine**: For he attaches himself not to the words of the father, but to what is of most importance, his wishes; for he was in such despair, that his wish was that she should return to life, not thinking that she could be found alive, whom he had left dying.  

**Theophylact**: Now this man was faithful in part, inasmuch as he fell at the feet of Jesus, but in that he begged of Him to come, he did not shew as much faith as he ought. For he ought to have said, 'Speak the word only, and my daughter shall be healed.' There follows, *and He went away with him, and much people followed Him, and thronged Him; and a woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years*.  

**Chrysostom**, see Chrys., Hom. in Matt., 31: This woman, who was celebrated and known to all, did not dare to approach the Saviour openly, nor to [p. 98] come to Him, because, according to the law, she was unclean; for this reason she touched Him behind, and not in front, for that she durst not do, but only ventured to touch the hem of His garment. It was not however the hem of the garment, but her frame of mind that made her whole. There follows, *for she said: If I may but touch His clothes, I shall be whole*.  

**Theophylact**: Most faithful indeed is this woman, who hoped for healing from His garments. For which reason she obtains health. Wherefore it goes on, *And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed*.  

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant. e Cat. in Marc.: Now the virtues of Christ are by His own will imparted to those men, who touch Him by faith. Wherefore there follows, *and Jesus, immediately knowing in Himself that virtue had gone out of Him, turned Him about in the press, and said: Who touched My clothes*? The virtues indeed of the Saviour do not go out of Him locally or corporally, nor in any respect pass away from Him. For being incorporeal, they go forth to others and are given to others; they are not however separated from Him, from whom they are said to go forth, in the same way as sciences are given by the teacher to his pupils. Therefore it says, *Jesus, knowing in Himself the virtue which had gone out of Him*, to shew that with His knowledge, and not without His being aware of it, the woman was healed. But He asked, *who touched me?* although He knew her who touched Him, that He might bring to light the woman, by her coming forward, and proclaim her faith, and lest the virtue of His miraculous work should be consigned to oblivion. It goes on, *and His disciples said unto Him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched Me?* But the Lord asked, *who touched Me*, that is in thought and faith, for the crowds who throng Me cannot be said to touch Me, for they do not come near to Me in thought and in faith. There follows, *and He looked round about to see her that had done this thing*.  

**Theophylact**: For the Lord wished to declare the woman, first to give His approbation to her faith, secondly to urge the chief of the synagogue to a confident hope that He could thus cure his child, and also to free the woman from fear. For the woman feared because she had stolen health. Wherefore there follows, *but the woman fearing and trembling, **knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before Him, and told Him all the truth*.  

**Bede**, in Marc., 2, 22: Observe that the object of His question was that the woman should confess the truth of her long want of faith, of her sudden belief and healing, and so herself be confirmed in faith, and afford an example to others. *But He said to her: Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague*. He said not, Thy faith is about to make thee whole, but has made thee whole, that is, in that thou hast believed, thou hast already been made whole.  

**Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant. e Cat. in Marc., see Chrys., Hom. in Matt., 31: He calls her *daughter* because she was saved by her faith; for faith in Christ makes us His children.  

**Theophylact**: But He saith to her, *go in peace*, that is, in rest, which means, go and have rest, for up to this time thou hast been in pains and torture.  

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**: Or else He says, *go in peace*, sending her away into that which is the final good, for God dwells in peace, that thou mayest know, that she was not only healed in body, but also from the causes of bodily pain, that is, from her sins.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Mystically, however, Jairus comes after the healing of the woman, because when the fulness of the Gentiles has come in, then shall Israel be saved (Rom 11). Jairus means either illuminating, or illuminated, that is, the Jewish people, having cast off the shadow of the letter, enlightened by the Spirit, and enlightening others, falling at the feet of the Word, that is, humbling itself before the Incarnation of Christ, prays for her daughter, for when a man lives himself, he makes others live also. Thus Abraham, and Moses, and Samuel, intercede for the people who are dead, and Jesus comes upon their prayers.  

**Bede**: Again, the Lord going to the child, who is to be healed, is thronged by the crowd, because though He gave healthful advice to the Jewish nation, He is oppressed by the wicked habits of that carnal people; but the woman with an issue of blood, cured by the Lord, is the Church gathered together from the nations, for the issue of blood may be either understood of the pollution of idolatry, or of those deeds, which are accompanied by pleasure to flesh and blood. But whilst the word of the Lord decreed salvation to Judaea, the people of the Gentiles by an assured hope seized upon the health, promised and prepared for others.  

**Theophylact**: Or else, by the woman, who had a bloody flux, understand human nature; for sin rushed in upon it, which since it killed the soul, might be said to spill its blood. It could not be cured by many physicians, that is, by the wise men of this world, and of the Law and the Prophets; but the moment that it touched the hem of Christ's garment, that is, His flesh, it was healed, for whosoever believes the Son of man to be Incarnate is he who touches the hem of His garment.  

**Bede**: Wherefore one believing woman touches the Lord, whilst the crowd throngs Him, because He, who is grieved by divers heresies, or by wicked habits, is worshipped faithfully with the heart of the Catholic Church alone. But the Church of the Gentiles came behind Him; because though it did not see the Lord present in the flesh, for the mysteries of His Incarnation had been gone through, yet it attained to the grace of His faith, and so when by partaking of His sacraments, it merited salvation from its sins, as it were the fountain of its blood was dried up by the touch of His garments. And the Lord looked round about to see her who had done this, because He judges that all who deserve to be saved are worthy of His look and of His pity.
