# Chapter 6 · Lecture 8

53. And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Genezareth, and set to the shore.  

> 54. And when they were come out of the ship, straightway they knew Him,

> 55. And ran through that whole region round about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard He was.

> 56. And whithersoever He entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought Him that they might touch if it were but the border of His garment: and as many as touched Him were made whole.

> **Gloss**: The Evangelist, having shewn the danger which the disciples had sustained in their passage, and their deliverance from it, now shews the place to which they sailed, saying, *and when they had passed over, they came into the land of Gennesaret, and drew to the shore*.

**Theophylact**: The Lord remained at the above-mentioned place for some time. Therefore the Evangelist subjoins, *and when they had come out of the ship, straightway they knew Him.* That is, the inhabitants of the country.  

**Bede**: But they knew Him by report, not by His features; or through the greatness of His miracles, even His person was known to some. See too how great was the faith of the men of the land of Gennesaret, so that they were not content with the healing of those who were present, but sent to other towns round about, that all might hasten to the Physician; wherefore there follows, *and ran through the whole region round about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard He was*.  

Wherefore it also follows: *and whithersoever He entered into villages, or cities, or country, **they laid the sick in the streets, and besought Him that they might touch if it were but the border of His garment: and as many as touched Him were made whole*. For the miracle which had been wrought on the woman with an issue of blood, had reached the ears of many, and caused in them that great faith, by which they were healed. It goes on: *and as many as touched Him were made whole.*  

**Bede**: Again, in a mystical sense, do thou understand by the hem of His garment the slightest of His commandments, for whosoever shall transgress it *shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven* (Matt. 5:19), or else His assumption of our flesh, by which we have come to the Word of God, and afterwards, shall have the enjoyment of His majesty.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Furthermore that which is said, *and as many as touched Him were made whole*, shall be fulfilled, when grief and mourning shall fly away.
