# Chapter 10 · Lecture 2

13. And they brought young children to Him, that He should touch them: and His disciples rebuked those that brought them.  

> 14. But when Jesus saw it, He was much displeased, and said unto them, "Suffer the little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God." [p. 198]

> 15. Verily I say unto you, "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein."

> 16. And He took them up in His arms, put His hands upon them, and blessed them.

> **Theophylact**: The wickedness of the Pharisees in tempting Christ, has been related above, and now is shewn the great faith of the multitude, who believed that Christ conferred a blessing on the children whom they brought to Him, by the mere laying on of His hands. Wherefore it is said: *and they brought young children to Him, that He might touch them*.

**Chrysostom**: But the disciples, out of regard for the dignity of Christ, forbade those who brought them. And this is what is added: *and His disciples rebuked those who brought them*. But our Saviour, in order to teach His disciples to be modest in their ideas, and to tread under foot worldly pride, takes the children to Him, and assigns to them the kingdom of God. Wherefore it goes on: *and He said unto them: Suffer the little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not*.  

**Origin**, in Matt., XV, 7: If any of those who profess to hold the office of teaching in the Church should see a person bringing to them some of the foolish of this world, and low born, and weak, who for this reason are called children and infants, let him not forbid the man who offers such an one to the Saviour, as though he were acting without judgment. After this He exhorts those of His disciples who are already grown to full stature to condescend to be useful to children, that they may become to children as children, that they may gain children [1 Cor 9:22]; for He Himself, when He was in the form of God, humbled Himself, and became a child. One which He adds: "For of such is the kingdom of heaven."  

**Chrysostom**: For indeed the mind of a child is pure from all passions, for which reason, we ought by free choice to do those works, which children hate by nature.  

**Theophylact**: Wherefore He says not, "for of" these, but *of such is the kingdom of God*, that is, of persons who have both in their intention and their work the harmlessness and simplicity which children have by nature. For a child does not hate, does nothing of evil [p. 199] intent, nor though beaten does he quit his mother; and though she clothe him in vile garments, prefers them to kingly apparel; in like manner he, who lives according to the good ways of his mother the Church, honours nothing before her, nay, not pleasure, which is the queen of many; wherefore also the Lord subjoins, *verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein*.  

**Bede**: That is, if ye have not innocence and purity of mind like that of children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Or else, we are ordered to receive the kingdom of God, that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, as a little child, because as a child, when he is taught, does not contradict his teachers, nor put together reasonings and words against them, but receives with faith what they teach, and obeys them with awe, so we also are to receive the word of the Lord with simple obedience, and without any gainsaying. It goes on: *and He took them up in His arms, put His hands upon them, and blessed them*.  

**Pseudo-Chrysostom**, Vict. Ant, e Cat. in Marc.: Fitly does He take them up into His arms to bless them, as it were, lifting into His own bosom, and reconciling Himself to His creation, which in the beginning fell from Him, and was separated from Him. Again, He puts His hands upon the children, to teach us the working of his divine power; and indeed, He puts His hands upon them, as others are wont to do, though His operation is not as that of others, for though He was God, He kept to human ways of acting, as being very man.  

**Bede**: Having embraced the children, He also blessed them, implying that the lowly in spirit are worthy of His blessing, grace and love.
