# Chapter 12 · Lecture 2

13. And they send unto Him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, to catch Him in His words.  

> 14. And when they were come, they say unto Him, "Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man; for thou regardest not the person of men, but [p. 241] teachest the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not?

> 15. Shall we give, or shall we not give?" But He, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, "Why tempt ye me? bring me a penny, that I may see it."

> 16. And they brought it. And He saith unto them, "Whose is this image and superscription?" And they said unto Him, "Caesar's."

> 17. And Jesus answering said unto them, "Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's." And they marvelled at Him.

> **Bede**: The Chief Priests though they sought to take Him, feared the multitude, and therefore they endeavored to effect what they could not do of themselves, by means of earthly powers, that they might themselves appear to be guiltless of His death. And therefore it is said, *and they send unto Him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, to catch Him in His words*.

**Theophylact**: We have said elsewhere of the Herodians, that they were a certain new heresy, who said that Herod was the Christ, because the succession of the kingdom of Judah had failed. Others however say that the Herodians were the soldiers of Herod, whom the Pharisees brought as witnesses of the words of Christ, that they might take Him, and lead Him away. But observe how in their wickedness they wished to deceive Christ by flattery; for it goes on: *Master, we know that thou art true*.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: For they questioned Him with honied words, and they surrounded Him as bees, who carry honey in their mouth, but a sting in their tail.  

**Bede**: But this bland and crafty question was intended to induce Him in His answer rather to fear God than Caesar, and to say that tribute should not be paid, so that the Herodians immediately on hearing it might hold Him to be an author of sedition against the Romans. And therefore they add, *and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the person of any*.  

**Theophylact**: So that thou wilt not honour Caesar, that is, against the truth. Therefore they add, *but teachest the way of God in truth. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? Shall we give, or shall we not give?* For their whole plot was one which had a precipice on both sides, so that if He said that it was lawful to give tribute to Caesar, they might provoke the people against Him, as though He wished to reduce the nation itself to slavery; but if He said, that it was not lawful, they might accuse Him, as though He was stirring up the people against Caesar; the Fountain of wisdom escaped their snares. Wherefore there follows: *but He, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them: Why tempt ye me? bring me a penny, that I may see it. And they brought it*.  

**Bede**: A denarius was a piece of money, accounted equal to ten smaller coins, and bearing the image of Caesar; wherefore there follows: *and He saith unto them: Whose is this image and superscription? And they said unto Him: Caesar's*. Let those who think that our Saviour asked the question through ignorance and not by an economy, learn from this that He might have known whose image it was; but He puts the question, in order to return them a fitting answer. Wherefore there follows: *and Jesus answering said unto them: Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's*.  

**Theophylact**: As if He had said, Give what bears an image to him whose image it bears, that is, the penny to Caesar; for we can both pay Caesar his tribute, and offer to God what is His own.  

**Bede**: That is, tithes, first-fruits, oblations, and victims. In the same way as He gave tribute both for Himself and Peter, He also gave to God the things that are God's, doing the will of his Father.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Render to Caesar the money bearing his image, which is collected for him, and render yourselves willingly up to God, for the light of thy countenance, O Lord (Ps 4:6), and not of Caesar's, is stamped upon us.  

**Theophylact**: The inevitable wants of our bodies is as Caesar unto each of us; the Lord therefore orders that there should be given to the body its own, that is, food and raiment, and to God the things that are God's. It goes on: *and they marvelled at Him*. They who ought to have believed, wondered at such great wisdom, because they had found no place for their craftiness.
