# Chapter 12 · Lecture 6

38. And He said unto them in His doctrine, "Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the marketplaces,  

> 39. And the chief seats in the synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts:

> 40. Which devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation."

> **Pseudo-Jerome**: After confuting the Scribes and Pharisees, He burns up as a fire their dry and withered examples. Wherefore it is said, "And He said unto them in His doctrine, Beware of the Scribes, which love to go in long clothing."

**Bede**: To walk in long clothing is to go forth into public clad in garments too much ornamented, in which amongst other things, that rich man, who fared sumptuously every day, is said to have sinned.  

**Theophylact**: But they used to walk in honourable garments, because they wished to be highly esteemed for it, and in like manner they desired other things, which lead to glory. For it goes on: "And love salutations in the marketplaces, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts."  

**Bede**: We must observe that He does not forbid that those, to whom it falls by the rule of their office, should be saluted in the marketplace, or have chief seats and places at feasts, but He teaches that those who love those things unduly, whether they have them or no, are to be avoided by the faithful as wicked men: that is, He blames the intention and not the office; although this too is culpable, that the very men who wish to be called masters of the synagogue in Moses' seat, should have to do with lawsuits in the marketplace. We are in two way ordered to beware of those who are desirous of vain [p. 251] glory; first, we should not be seduced by their hypocrisy into thinking that what they do is good; nor secondly, should we be excited to imitate them, through a vain rejoicing in being praised for those virtues which they affect.  

**Theophylact**: He also especially teaches the Apostles, not to have any communication with the scribes, but to imitate Christ Himself; and in ordaining them to be masters in the duties of life, He places others under them. [ed. note: Theophylact's words should be translated - He becomes their example in the duties of life.]  

**Bede**: But they do not only seek for praise from men, but also for gain. Where there follows, "Which devour widows' houses, under the pretence of long prayers." For there are men who pretending to be just hesitate not to receive money from persons who are troubled in conscience, as though they would be their advocates in the judgment. A hand stretched out to the poor is always an accompaniment to prayer, but these men pass the night in prayer, that they may take away money from the poor.  

**Theophylact**: But the Scribes used to come to women, who were left without the protection of their husbands, as though they were their protectors; and by a pretence of prayer, a reverend exterior and hypocrisy, they used to deceive widows, and thus also devour the houses of the rich. It goes on: "These shall receive a greater damnation," that is, than the other Jews, who sinned.
