# Chapter 14 · Lecture 9

43. And immediately, while He yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the Chief Priests and the Scribes and the elders.  

> 44. And he that betrayed Him had given them a token, saying, “Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead him away safely.”

> 45. And as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway [p. 297] to Him, and saith, “Master, master;” and kissed Him.

> 46. And they laid their hands on Him, and took Him.

> 47. And one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant of the High Priest, and cut off his ear.

> 48. And Jesus answered and said unto them, “Are ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me?”

> 49. “I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took Me not: but the Scriptures must be fulfilled.”

> 50. And they all forsook Him, and fled.

> 51. And there followed Him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him:

> 52. And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.

> **Bede**: After that our Lord had prayed three times, and had obtained by His prayers that the fear of the Apostles should be amended by future repentance, He, being tranquil as to His Passion, goes to His persecutors, concerning the coming of whom the Evangelist says, “And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas Iscariot, on of the twelve.”

**Theophylact**: This is not put without reason, but to the greater conviction of the traitor, since though he was of the chief company amongst the disciples, he turned himself to furious enmity against our Lord. There follows: “And with him a great multitude with swords and staves from the Chief Priests and the Scribes and the elders.”  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: For he who despairs of help from God, has recourse to the power of the world.  

**Bede**: But Judas had still something of the shame of a disciple, for he did not openly betray Him to His persecutors, but by the token of a kiss. Wherefore it goes on: “And he that betrayed Him had given them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, [p. 298] and lead him away safely.”  

**Theophylact**: See how in his blindness he thought to deceive Christ by the kiss, so as to be looked upon by Him as His friend. But if thou wert a friend, Judas, how didst thou come with His enemies? But wickedness is ever without foresight. It goes on: “And as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway to Him, and saith, Master, master; and kissed Him.”  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Judas gives the kiss as a token, with poisonous guile, just as Cain offered a crafty, reprobate sacrifice.  

**Bede**: With envy and with a wicked confidence, he calls Him master, and gives Him a kiss, in betraying Him. But the Lord receives the kiss of the traitor, not to teach us to deceive, but lest he should seem to avoid betrayal, and at the same time to fulfil that Psalm, “Among them that are enemies unto peace, I labour for peace.” [Ps 120:5] It goes on: “And they laid hands on Him, and took Him.”  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: This is the Joseph who was sold by his brethren [Ps 105:18], and into whose soul the iron entered. [note: this passage not found in the Venice ed. of the Pseudo-Jerome] There follows: “And one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant of the High Priest, and cut off his ear.”  

**Bede**: Peter did this, as John declares, with the same ardent mind with which he did all things; for he knew how Phineas had by punishing sacrilegious persons received the reward of righteousness and of perpetual priesthood.  

**Theophylact**: Mark conceals his name, lest he should seem to be praising his master for his zeal for Christ. Again, the action of Peter points out that they were disobedient and unbelieving, despising the Scriptures; for if they had ears to hear the Scriptures, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. But he cut off the ear of a servant of the High Priest, for the Chief Priests especially passed over the Scriptures, like disobedient servants. It goes on: “And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me?”  

**Bede**: As if He had said, it is foolish to seek with swords and staves Him, who offers Himself to you of His own accord, and to search, as for one who hides Himself, by night and by means of a traitor, for Him who taught daily in the temple.  

**Theophylact**: This, however, is a proof of His divinity, for when He taught in the temple they were unable to take Him, [p. 299] although He was in their power, because the time of His Passion had not yet come; but when He Himself was willing, then He gave Himself up, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, “for he was led as a lamb to the slaughter,” not crying nor raising His voice, but suffering willingly. It goes on: “And they all forsook Him and fled.”  

**Bede**: In this is fulfilled the word, which the Lord had spoken, that all His disciples should be offended in Him that same night. There follows: “And there followed Him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body,” that is, he had no other clothing but this linen cloth. It goes on: “And they laid hold on him, and he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.” That is, he fled from them, whose presence and whose deeds he abhorred, not from the Lord, for Whom his love remained fixed in his mind, when absent from Him in body.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Just as Joseph left his mantle behind him, and fled naked from the wanton woman; so also let him, who would escape the hands of the evil ones, quit in mind all that is of the world, and fly after Jesus.  

**Theophylact**: It appears probable that this young man was of that house, where they had eaten the Passover. But some say that this young man was James, the brother of our Lord, who was called Just; who after the ascension of Christ received from the Apostles the throne of the bishopric of Jerusalem.  

**Greg**., Mor. 14, 49: Or, he says this of John, who, although he afterwards returned to the cross to hear the words of the Redeemer, at first was frightened and fled.  

**Bede**: For that he was a young man at that time, is evident from his long sojourn in the flesh. Perhaps he escaped from the hands of those who held him for the time, and afterwards got back his garment and returned, mingling under cover of the darkness with those who were leading Jesus, as though he was one of them, until he arrived at the door of the High Priest, to whom he was known, as he himself testifies in the Gospel. But as Peter, who washed away the sin of his denial with the tears of penitence, shews the recovery of those who fall away in time of martyrdom, so the other disciples who prevented their actual seizure, teach the prudence of flight to those who feel themselves unequal to undergo tortures. [p. 300]
