# Chapter 14 · Lecture 6

22. And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, “Take, eat: This is My Body.”  

> 23. and He took the cup, and when He had given thanks, He gave it to them, and they all drank of it.

> 24. And He said unto them, “This is My Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many.”

> 25. “Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink It new in the Kingdom of God.”

> **Bede**: When the rites of the old Passover were finished, He passed to the new, in order, that is, to substitute the Sacrament of His own Body and Blood, for the flesh and blood of the lamb. Wherefore there follows: “And as they did eat, Jesus took bread”; that is, in order to shew that He, Himself, is that person to whom the Lord swore, “Thou art a Priest forever after the order of Melchizedec.” [Ps 100:4] There follows: “And blessed, and brake it.”

**Theophylact**: That is, giving thanks, He brake it, which we also do, with the addition of some prayers.  

**Bede**: He Himself also breaks the bread, which He gives to His disciples, to shew that the breaking of His Body was to take place, not against His Will, nor without His intervention; He also blessed it, because He with the Father and the Holy Spirit filled His human nature, which He took upon Him in order to suffer, with the grace of Divine power. He blessed bread and brake it, because He deigned to subject to death His manhood, which He had taken upon [p. 286] Him in such a way as to shew that there was within it the power of Divine immortality, and to teach them that therefore He would the more quickly raise it from the dead. There follows: “And gave to them, and said, ‘Take, eat: This is My Body.’ “  

**Theophylact**: That, namely, which I now give and which ye take. But the bread is not a mere figure of the Body of Christ, but is changed into the very Body of Christ. For the Lord said, “The bread which I give you is My Flesh.” But the Flesh of Christ is veiled from our eyes on account of our weakness, for bread and wine are things to which we are accustomed, if however we saw flesh and blood we could not bear to take them. For this reason the Lord bending Himself to our weakness keeps the forms of bread and wine, but changes the bread and wine into the reality of His Body and Blood.  

**Chrysostom**: Even now also that Christ is close to us; He Who prepared that table, Himself also consecrates it. For it is not man who makes the offerings to be the Body and Blood of Christ, but Christ Who was crucified for us. The words are spoken by the mouth of the Priest, and are consecrated by the power and the grace of God. By this word which He spoke, “This is My Body”, the offerings are consecrated; and as that word which says, “Increase and multiply, and fill the earth,” [Gen 1:28] was sent forth but once, yet has its effect throughout all time, when nature does the work of generation; so also that voice was spoken once, yet gives confirmation to the Sacrifice through all the tables of The Church even to this day, even to His advent.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: But in a mystical sense, the Lord transfigures into bread His Body, which is the present Church, which is received in faith, is blessed in its number, is broken in its sufferings, is given in its examples, is taken in its doctrines; and He forms His Blood in the chalice of water and wine mingled together, that by one we may be purged from our sins, by the other redeemed from their punishment [formans sanguinem suum ap. I’seudo-Hier]. For by the blood of the lamb our houses are preserved from the smiting of the Angel, and our enemies perish in the waters of the Red Sea, which are the Sacraments of the Church of Christ. Wherefore it goes on: “And He took the cup, and when He had given thanks, He gave it to them.” For we are saved by the grace of the Lord, not by our own [p. 287] deserts.  

**Gregory**, Mor. ii, 37: When His Passion was approaching, He is said to have taken bread and given thanks. He therefore gave thanks, Who took upon Him the stripes of other men’s wickedness; He Who did nothing worthy of smiting, humbly gives a blessing in His Passion, to shew us, what each should do when beaten for his own sins, since He Himself bore calmly the stripes due to the sin of others; furthermore to shew us, what we who are the subjects of the Father should do under correction, when He Who is His equal gave thanks under the lash.  

**Bede**: The wine of the Lord’s cup is mixed with water, because we should remain in Christ and Christ in us. For on the testimony of John, the waters are the people, [Rev 17:15] and it is not lawful for any one to offer either wine alone, or water alone, lest such an oblation should mean that the head may be severed from the members, and either that Christ could suffer without love for our redemption, and that we can be saved or be offered to the Father without His Passion. It goes on: “And they all drank of it.”  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Happy intoxication, saving fulness, which the more we drink gives the greater sobriety of mind!  

**Theophylact**: Some say that Judas did not partake in these Mysteries, but that he went out before the Lord gave the Sacrament. Some again say that He gave him also of that Sacrament.  

**Chrysostom**: For Christ offered His Blood to him who betrayed Him, that he might have remission of his sins, if he had chosen to cease to be wicked.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Judas therefore drinks and is not satisfied, nor can he quench the thirst of the everlasting fire, because he unworthily partakes of the Mysteries of Christ. There are some in The Church whom the Sacrifice does not cleanse, but their foolish thought draws them on to sin, for they have plunged themselves in the stinking slough of cruelty.  

**Chrysostom**: Let there not be therefore a Judas at the table of the Lord; this Sacrifice is spiritual food, for as bodily food, working on a belly filled with humours which are opposed to it, is hurtful, so this spiritual food if taken by one polluted with wickedness, rather brings him to perdition, not by its own nature, but through the fault of the recipient. Let therefore our mind be pure in all things, and our thought pure, for that Sacrifice is pure. There follows: [p. 288] “And He said unto them, ‘This is My Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many.’ “  

**Bede**: This refers to the different circumstances of the Old Testament, which was consecrated by the blood of calves and of goats; and the lawgiver said in sprinking it, “This is the blood of the Testament which God has injoined unto you.” [Heb 9:19-20, ref. Ex 24:8] It goes on: “Which is shed for many.”  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: For it does not cleanse all. It goes on: “Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God.”  

**Theophylact**: As if He had said, I will not drink wine until the Resurrection; for He calls His Resurrection “the kingdom”, as He then reigned over death. But after His Resurrection He ate and drank with His disciples, shewing that it was He Himself who had suffered. But He drank it “new”, that is, in a new and strange manner, for He had not a body subject to suffering, and requiring food, but immortal and incorruptible. We may also understand it in this way. The vine is the Lord Himself. By the offspring (genimen) of the vine is meant mysteries, and the secret understanding, which He Himself begets (gererat), Who teaches man knowledge. But in the kingdom of God, that is, in the world to come, He will drink with His disciples mysteries and knowledge, teaching us new things, and revealing what He now hides.  

**Bede**: Or else, Isaiah testifies that the synagogue is called the vine or the vineyard of the Lord, saying, “The vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel.” [Isa 5:7] The Lord therefore when about to go to His Passion, says, “I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine,” as if He had said openly, I will no longer delight in the carnal rites of the synagogue, in which also these rites of the Paschal Lamb have held the chief place. For the time of My Resurrection shall come, that day shall come, when in the kingdom of Heaven, that is, raised on high with the glory of immortal life, I will be filled with a new joy, together with you, for the salvation of the same people born again of the fountain of spiritual grace.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: But we must consider that here the Lord changes the sacrifice without changing the time; so that we never celebrate the Caena Domini before the fourteenth moon. He who celebrates the Resurrection on [p. 289] the fourteenth moon, will celebrate the Caena Domini on the eleventh moon, which was never done in either Old or New Testament.
