# Chapter 14 · Lecture 4

12. And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the Passover, His disciples said unto Him: Where wilt Thou that we go and prepare that Thou mayest eat the Passover?  

> 13. And He sendeth forth two of His disciples, and saith unto them: Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water - follow him.

> 14. And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the house, The Master saith, Where is [p. 281] the guestchamber, where I shall eat the Passover with My disciples?

> 15. And he will shew you a large upper room furnished and prepared: there make ready for us.

> 16. And His disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as He had said unto them: and they made ready the Passover.

> **Chrysostom**: Whilst Judas was plotting how to betray Him, the rest of the disciples were taking care of the preparation of the Passover: where it is said, “And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the Passover, His disciples said unto Him, ‘Where wilt thou that we go and prepare where thou mayest eat the Passover?’ “

**Bede**: He means by the first day of the Passover the fourteenth day of the first month, when they throw aside leaven, and were wont to sacrifice, that is, to kill the lamb at even. The Apostle explaining this says, “Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us.” [1 Cor 5:7]. For although He was crucified on the next day, that is, on the fifteenth moon, yet on the night when the lamb was offered up, He committed to His disciples the Mysteries of His Body and Blood, which they were to celebrate, and was seized upon and bound by the Jews; thus He consecrated the beginning of His Sacrifice, that is, of His Passion.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: But the unleavened bread which was eaten with bitterness, that is with bitter herbs, is our redemption, and the bitterness is the Passion of Our Lord.  

**Theophylact**: From the words of the disciples, “Where wilt thou that we go?”, it seems evident that Christ had no dwelling-place, and that the disciples had no houses of their own; for if so, they would have taken Him thither.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: For they say, “Where wilt thou that we go?”, to shew us that we should direct our steps according to the Will of God. But the Lord points out with whom He would eat the Passover, and after His custom He sends two disciples, which we have explained above; wherefore it goes on, “And He sendeth forth two of His disciples, and He saith unto them, ‘Go ye into the city.’ “  

**Theophylact**: He sent two of His disciples, that is, Peter and John, as Luke says, to a man unknown to [p. 282] Him, implying by this that He might, if He had pleased, have avoided His Passion. For what could not He work in other men, who influenced the mind of a person unknown to Him, so that he received them? He also gives them a sign how they were to know the house, when He adds, “And there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water.”  

**Augustine**, de Con. Evan, ii, 80: Mark says a pitcher, Luke a two-handed vessel; one points out the kind of vessel, the other the mode of carrying it; both however mean the same truth.  

**Bede**: And it is a proof of the presence of His divinity, that in speaking with His disciples, He knows what is to take place elsewhere; wherefore it follows, “And His disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as He had said unto them; and they made ready the Passover.”  

**Chrysostom**: Not our Passover, but in the meanwhile that of the Jews; but He did not only appoint ours, but Himself became our Passover. Why too did He eat it? Because He was “made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,” [Gal 4:4] and Himself gave rest to the Law. And lest any one should say that He did away with it, because He could not fulfil its hard and difficult obedience, He first Himself fulfilled it, and then set it to rest.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: And in a mystical sense the city is The Church, surrounded by the wall of faith, the man who meets them is the primitive people, the pitcher of water is the law of the letter.  

**Bede**: Or else, the water is the laver of grace, the pitcher points out the weakness of those who were to shew that grace to the world.  

**Theophylact**: He who is baptized carries the pitcher of water, and he who bears baptism upon him comes to his rest, if he lives according to his reason; and he obtains rest, as being in the house. Wherefore it is added, “Follow Him.”  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: That is, him who leads to the lofty place, where is the refreshment prepared by Christ. The lord of the house is the Apostle, Peter, to who the Lord has entrusted His house, that there may be one faith under one Shepherd. [ref John 21:15] The large upper-room is the wide-spread Church, in which the Name of the Lord is spoken of, prepared by a variety of powers and tongues.  

**Bede**: Or else, the large upper-room is spiritually the Law, which comes forth from the narrowness of the letter, and in a lofty place, that is, in the lofty chamber of the soul, receives [p.283] the Saviour. But it is designedly that the names both of the bearer of the water, and of the lord of the house, are omitted, to imply that power is given to all who wish to celebrate the true Passover, that is, to be embued with the Sacraments of Christ, and to receive Him in the dwelling-place of their mind.  

**Theophylact**: Or else, the lord of the house is the intellect, which points out the large upper room, that is, the loftiness of intelligences, and which, though it be high, yet has nothing of vain glory, or of pride, but is prepared and made level by humility. But there, that is, in such a mind Christ’s Passover is prepared by Peter and John, that is by action and contemplation.
