# Chapter 15 · Lecture 5

29. And they that passed by railed on Him, [p. 323] wagging their heads, and saying, “Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days,  

> 30. Save thyself, and come down from the cross.”

> 31. Likewise also the Chief Priests mocking said among themselves with the Scribes, “He saved others; himself he cannot save.”

> 32. “Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe.” And they that were crucified with Him reviled Him.

> **Pseudo-Jerome**: The foal of Judah has been tied to the vine, and his clothes dyed in the blood of the grape, [Gen 49:11] and the kids tear the vine, blaspheming Christ, and wagging their heads. Wherefore it is said: “And they that passed by railed on Him, wagging their heads and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple.”

**Theophylact**: For the passers by blasphemed Christ, reproaching Him as a seducer. But the devil moved them to bid Him come down from the Cross; for he knew that salvation was being won by the Cross, therefore he again proceeded to tempt Christ, so that if He came down from the Cross, he might be certain that He is not truly the Son of God, and so the salvation, which is by the Cross, might be done away. But He being truly the Son of God, did not come down; for if He ought to have come down, He would not have ascended there at all; but since He saw that in this way salvation must be effected, He underwent the crucifixion, and many other sufferings, unto the finishing of His work. It goes on: “Likewise also the Chief Priests mocking said among themselves with the Scribes, He saved others, himself he cannot save.” They said this, to do away with His miracles, as though those which He had done were but the semblance of them, for by working miracles He saved many.  

**Bede**: Thus also they confess, though against their will, that He saved many. Therefore your words condemn you, for He who saved others could have saved Himself. It goes on: “Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe.”  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Afterwards they saw Him arise from the grave, though they would not believe that He could come down from [p. 324] the tree of the Cross. Where, O Jews, is your lack of faith? Your own selves I appeal to; your own selves I bring as judges. How much more wonderful is it that a dead man should arise, than that one yet living should choose to come down from the cross. Ye asked but small things, till greater should have come to pass; but your want of faith could not be healed by signs much greater than those for which you sought. Here “all have gone out of the way, all are become abominable.” [Ps 13:3] Wherefore it goes on: And they that were crucified with Him reviled.”  

**Augustine**, de. Con. Evan. 3, 16: How can this be, when according to Luke one only reviled Him, but was rebuked by the other who believed on God; unless we understand that Matthew and Mark, who touched but slightly on this place, put the plural for the singular number?  

**Theophylact**: Or else, both at first reviled Him, then one recognizing Him as innocent, rebukes the other for blaspheming Him.
