# Chapter 15 · Lecture 1

1. And straightway in the morning the Chief Priests held a consultation with the elders and Scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried Him away, and delivered Him to Pilate.  

> 2. And Pilate asked Him, “Art thou the King of the Jews?” And He answering said unto him, “Thou sayest it.”

> 3. And the Chief Priests accused Him of many things: but he answered nothing.

> 4. And Pilate asked Him again, saying, “Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee.”

> 5. But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled.

> **Bede**, in Marc., 4, 44: The Jews had a custom of delivering him whom they had condemned to death, bound to the judge. Wherefore after the condemnation of Christ, the Evangelist adds: “And straightway in the morning the Chief Priests held a consultation with the elders and Scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried Him away, and delivered Him to Pilate.” But it must be observed, that they did not then first bind Him, but they bound Him on first taking Him in the garden by night, as John declares.

**Theophylact**: They then gave Jesus up to the Romans, but were themselves given up by God into the hands of the Romans, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, which say, “Recompense them after the work of their hands.” [Ps 28:5] It goes on: “And Pilate asked Him, Art thou the King of the Jews?”  

**Bede**: By [p. 310] Pilate’s asking Him about no other accusation, except whether He was King of the Jews, they are convicted of impiety, for they could not even find a false accusation against our Saviour. It goes on: “And He answering said unto him, Thou sayest.” He answers in this way so as both to speak the truth, and yet not be open to cavil.  

**Theophylact**: For His answer is doubtful, since it may mean, Thou sayest, but I say not so.  

**Bede**: And observe that He does somewhere answer Pilate, who condemned Him unwillingly, but does not choose to answer the priests and great men, and judges them unworthy of a reply. It goes on: “And the Chief Priests accused Him of many things.”  

**Augustine**, de. Con. Evan., iii, 8: Luke has also laid open the false charges which they brought against Him; for he thus relates it: “And they began to accuse Him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King.” [Luke 23:2] There follows: “And Pilate asked Him, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee.”  

**Bede**: He indeed who condemns Jesus is a heathen, but he refers it to the people of the Jews as the cause. There follows: “But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled.” He was unwilling to give an answer, lest He should clear Himself of the charge, and be acquitted by the judge, and so the gain resulting from the Cross should be done away.  

**Theophlyact**: But Pilate wondered, because, though He was a teacher of the law, and eloquent, and able by His answer to destroy their accusations, He did not answer any thing, but rather bore their accusations courageously.
