# Chapter 15 · Lecture 3

16. And the soldiers led Him away into the hall, called Praetorium; and they called together the whole band.  

> 17. And they clothed Him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it about His head.

> 18. And began to salute Him, “Hail, King of the Jews!”

> 19. And they smote Him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon Him, and bowing their knees worshipped Him.

> 20. And when they had mocked Him, they took off the purple from Him, and put His own clothes on Him. And led Him out to crucify Him.

> **Theophylact**: The vainglory of soldiers, ever rejoicing in disorder and in insult, here displayed what properly belonged to them. Wherefore it is said, “And the soldiers led Him away into the hall called Praetorium, and they call together the whole band,” that is, the whole company of the soldiers, “and they clothed Him with purple as a king.”

**Bede**: For since He had been called King of the Jews, and the scribes and priests had objected to Him as a crime that He usurped rule over the Jewish people, they in derision strip Him of His former garments, and put on Him a purple robe, which ancient kings used to wear.  

**Augustine**, de Con. Evan., iii, 9: But we must understand that the words of Matthew, they “put of Him a scarlet robe,” Mark expresses by “clothed Him in purple”; for that scarlet robe was used by them in derision for the royal purple, and there is a sort of red purple, very like scarlet. It may also be that Mark mentions some purple which the robe had about it, though it was of a scarlet colour.  

**Bede**: But instead of the diadem, they put on Him a crown of thorns, wherefore it goes on, “And platted a crown of thorns, and put it about His head.” And for a royal sceptre they give Him a reed, as Matthew writes, and they bow before Him as a king, wherefore there follows, “And began to salute Him, Hail, King of the Jews!” And that the soldiers worshipped Him as one who falsely called Himself God, is clear from what is added: “And bowing their knees, worshipped Him,” as though He pretended to be God.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: His shame took away our shame; His bonds made us free; by the thorny crown of His head, we have obtained the crown of the kingdom; by His wounds we are healed.  

**Augustine**: It appears that Matthew and Mark here relate things which took place previously, not that they happened when Pilate had already delivered Him to be crucified. For John says that these things took place at Pilate’s house; but that which follows, “And when they had mocked Him, they took off the purple from Him, and put on Him His own clothes,” must be understood to have taken place last of all, when He was already being led to be crucified.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: But in a mystic sense, Jesus was stripped of His clothes, that is, of the Jews, and is clothed in a purple robe, that is, in the Gentile church, which is gathered together out of the rocks. Again, putting it off in the end, as offending, He again is clothed with the Jewish purple, [Rom 11:25] for when the fulness of the [p. 315] Gentiles is come in, then shall all Israel be saved.  

**Bede**: Or else, by the purple robe, with which the Lord is clothed, is meant His flesh itself, which He gave up to suffering, and by the thorny crown which He carried is meant, the taking upon Him of our sins.  

**Theophylact**: Let us also put on the purple and royal robe, because we must walk as kings treading on serpents and scorpions, and having sin under our feet. For we are called Christians, that is, anointed ones, just as kings were then called anointed. Let us also take upon ourselves the crown of thorns, that is, let us make haste to be crowned with a strict life, with self-denials and purity.  

**Bede**: But they smite the head of Christ, who deny that He is very God. And because men are wont to use a reed to write with, they, as it were, smite the head of Christ with a reed, who speak against His divinity, and endeavour to confirm their error by the authority of Holy Writ. They spit in His face, who spit from them by their accursed words the presence of His grace. There are some also in this day, who adore Him, with a sure faith, as very God, but by their perverse actions, despise His words as though they were fabulous, and think the promises of that word inferior to worldly allurements. But just as Caiaphas said, though he knew not what it meant, “It is expedient for us that one man should die for the people,” [John 11:50] so also the soldiers do these things in ignorance.
