# Chapter 16 · Lecture 2

9. Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, He appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom He had cast seven devils.  

> 10. And she went and told them that had been with Him, as they mourned and wept.

> 11. And they, when they had heard that He was alive, and had been seen of her, believed not.

> 12. After that He appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the country.

> 13. And they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed they them.

> Augustine, de Con. Evan., iii, 25: Now we must consider how the Lord appeared after the Resurrection. For Mark says, “Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, He appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom He had cast seven devils.”

**Bede**: John tells us most fully how and when this appearance took place. But the Lord rose in the morning from the sepulchre in which He had been laid in the evening, that those words of the Psalm might be fulfilled, “Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.” [Ps 29:6]  

**Theophyact**: Or else put a stop at, “Now when Jesus was risen,” and then read, “early the first day of the week He appeared,” &c. [p. 341]  

**Greg**.: For as Samson at midnight not only left Gaza, but also carried away the gates of it, so also our Redeemer rising before the light, did not only come out free from hell, but destroyed also the very gates of hell. [Hom. in Evan., 33] But Mark here testifies that seven devils were cast out of Mary; and what is meant by “seven devils” save all vices? for as by seven days is understood all time, so by the number seven [see note d, p.149] a whole is fitly figured.  

**Theophylact**: But Mary had seven devils, because she was filled with all vices. Or else, by seven devils are meant seven spirits contrary to the seven virtues, as a spirit without fear, without wisdom, without understanding, and whatsoever else is opposed to the gifts of the Holy Ghost.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: Again, He is shewn to her, out of whom He had cast seven devils, because harlots and publicans shall go before the synagogue into the kingdom of heaven, as the thief reached it before the Apostles.  

**Bede**: In the beginning also woman brought man into sin, now she, who first tasted death, first sees the Resurrection, lest she should have to bear the reproach of perpetual guilt amongst men; and she who had been the channel of guilt to man, now has become the first channel of grace. For it goes on: “And she went and told them that had been with Him as they mourned and wept.”  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: They mourn and weep because they had not yet seen, but after a short time they shall receive a consolation. For blessed are they that weep now, for they shall be comforted.  

**Bede**: Fitly too is this woman, who was the first to announce the joy of our Lord’s Resurrection, said to have been cured of seven devils, lest any one worthily repenting of his sins should despair of pardon for what he had done, and that is might be shewn that “where sin abounded, grace did much more abound.” [Rom 5:20]  

**Severianus**, Chrysologus: Mary brings the news, not now as a woman, but in the person of the Church, so that, as above woman was silent, here as the Church she might bring tidings and speak. There follows: “And they when they heard that He was alive and had been seen by her, believed not.”  

**Greg**.: That the disciples were slow in believing our Lord’s Resurrection was not so much a weakness of theirs as it is our strength. For the Resurrection itself through their doubts was manifested by many proofs; and whilst we read and acknowledge them, what do we but become firmer through their doubting? There follows: “After this He appeared in [p. 342] another form unto two of them as they walked and went to a farm house.”  

**Augustine**: Luke relates the whole story respecting these two, one of whom was Cleophas, but Mark here touches but slightly upon it. That village of which Luke speaks may without absurdity be supposed to be what is here called a farm house, and indeed in some Greek manuscripts it is called, the country. But by this name are understood not only villages, but also boroughs and country towns, because they are without the city, which is the head and mother of all the rest. That which Mark expresses by the Lord’s appearance “in another form,” is what Luke means by saying that “their eye were holden that they could not know Him.” For something was upon their eyes, which was allowed to remain there, until the breaking of bread.  

**Severianus**, Chrysologus: But let no one suppose that Christ changed the form of His face by His Resurrection, but the form is changed when of mortal it becomes immortal, so that this means that He gained a glorious countenance, not that He lost the substance of His countenance. But He was seen of two; because faith in the Resurrection is to be preached and shewn to two people, that is, the Gentiles and the Jews. There follows: “And they went and told it unto the residue, neither believed they them.” How are we to understand the words of Mark compared with the account of Luke, that they then said, “The Lord hath risen indeed, and hath appeared unto Simon,” [Luke 24:34] if we do not suppose that there were some there who would not believe?  

**Theophylact**: For he does not say this of the eleven, but of some others, whom He calls the residue.  

**Pseudo-Jerome**: But in a mystic sense we may understand that faith here labours, leading the active life, but there it reigns secure in the contemplative vision. Here we see His face through a glass, there we shall see the truth face to face, wherefore He was shewn to them as they were walking, that is, labouring, in another form. And when it was told, the disciples did not believe, because they saw, like Moses, that which was not enough for them, for he said, “Shew me Thyself;” [Ex 33:18] forgetting his flesh, he prays in this life for that which we hope for in the life to come.
