# Chapter 3

**Verse 1 א**

"I am the man who has seen affliction under the rod of his wrath".

**Verse 2 א**

"He has driven and brought me into darkness without any light".

**Verse 3 א**

"Surely against me he turns his hand again and again the whole day long".

After an enumeration of many penalties (in Chapter 2) the despair of the people is excluded. Such exclusion is divided twofold.

First, despair is considered by appeals, second, is the argument for a fidelity that must be acceptable. As Verse 19 later states: "Remember my affliction and my bitterness, the wormwood and the gall." Third, an assumed faithfulness turns the people to prayer for (divine) mercy. Like expressed further on in Verse 37: "Who has commanded and it came to pass, unless the Lord has ordained it?"

On despair on appeals three ideas are conveyed. First is set forth affliction itself, second a reprobation is assumed. As later Verse 17 says: "My soul is bereft of peace, I have forgotten what happiness is".

Third, despair is concluded in Verse 18: "So I say, 'Gone is my glory, and' my expectation from the Lord'."

To the first idea (affliction itself) two further notions are added. First, the affliction is considered which people sustained through pressure of their hands. And second, the manner of this very affliction is viewed. Like Verse 4 says: "He has made my flesh and my skin waste away, and broken my bones

Third, a remedy for their escape is left out. Verse 7 so says: "He has walled me about so that I cannot escape; he has put heavy chains on me."

To the affliction sustained by the pressure of hands, three more ideas are advanced. First indignation is noticed of the person pressing hands. Verse 1 then states: "I am the man who has seen affliction under the rod of his wrath." Jeremiah himself here is speaking in his own person, for he himself has been afflicted like other persons, concerning whom he repudiates their misery. For, Revelations 3:17 claims: "For you say, I am rich, I have prospered, and I need nothing; not knowing that you are wretched, pitiable, poor, blind and naked." Thus allegorically such can be expressed about Christ and his Church. Morally, it can refer to human souls.

Second, a subtraction of consolation is viewed. Verse 2 so states: "He has driven and brought me into darkness without any light." Since, after blows, no consolation is offered in the accustomed manner. Thus, Job 3:23 asks: "Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, whom God has hedged in?"

Third is the condition for the blows, stated in Verse 3: "Surely against me he turns his hand again and again the whole day long". Namely, there follows a sequence of affliction that considers such blows alone.

Verse 3 again: "Surely against me he turns his hand again and again the whole day long." That is, striking blows again and again. Hence, Isaiah 9:12: "For all this, his anger is not turned away and his hand is stretched out still."

**Verse 4 ב**

"He has made my flesh and my skin waste away, and broken my bones."

**Verse 5 ב**

"He has besieged and enveloped me with bitterness and tribulation;"

**Verse 6 ב**

"He has made me dwell in darkness like the dead of long ago."

Verse 4 views the effect of divine blows. It is like a livid spot on a person's body, the effect from a rod inflicting blows. So, about this are three more views.

First is the weakening of powers of an entire people, including "my skin" representing the people surrounding on the outside; "and my flesh", the delicate and tender; and "bones", the fighters among the people. So, the Book of Baruch 3:10 says: "Why is it, O Israel, why is it that you are in the land of your enemies that you are growing old in a foreign country?"

Second is the siege of those people already weakening. Since Verse 5 reports: "He has besieged and enveloped me," Namely, the besieging army: "with bitterness and tribulation." That is, by an army that inflicts labor and bitterness on me. As Job 7:12 asks: "Am I the sea, or a sea monster, that you set a guard over me?"

Third, the imprisonment of those persons captured is considered. As expressed in Verse 6: "He has made me dwell in darkness like the dead of long ago." And Psalm 143 (142):3 says: "he has made me sit in darkness like those long dead."

Thus, these ideas can be referred to the prophet Jeremiah himself. Since, he himself has been confined by many obstacles, and also against his own body, and hidden in a prison.

**Verse 7 ג**

"He has walled me about so that I cannot escape; he has put heavy chains on me;"

**Verse 8 ג**

"Though I call and cry for help, he shuts out my prayer,"

**Verse 9 ג**

"He has blocked my ways with hewn stones, he has made my paths crooked."

A remedy for an escape from enemies' siege is cut off. So, Verse 7 states: "He has walled me about so that I cannot escape." That is, by the besieging army.

"He has put heavy chains on me." This indicates that I (Jeremiah) am besieged just like those persons who are sent to prison and cannot escape. Thus, Psalm 88(87):8 claims: "I am shut in so that I cannot escape." And Job 13:27 says: "You put my feet in the stocks, and watch all my paths."

Second, is cut off a remedy for escape, due to an exclusion of prayer. For Verse 8 states: "Though I call and cry for help, he shuts out my prayer." And, as Psalm 22(21):2 says: "O my God, I cry by day, but you do not answer; and by night, but find no rest."

Third, a remedy for escape is cut off due to a hindrance in counseling. As Verse 9 so expresses: "He has blocked my ways with hewn stones, he has made my paths crooked", Namely, he has blocked counsels for escaping: "with hewn stones": like to heavy impediments. The

prophet Hosea thus claims: "Therefore I will hedge up her way with thorns; and I will build a wall against her so that she cannot find her paths." (Hosea 2:6).

**Verse 10 ד**

"He is to me like a bear lying in wait, like a lion in hiding;"

**Verse 11 ד**

"He led me off my way and tore me to pieces; he has made me desolate;"

**Verse 12 ד**

"He bent his bow and set me as a mark for his arrow."

The manner for afflicting is stated here. First the manner is insidious, second, it is open. Verse 12 then says: "He bent his bow and set me as a mark for his arrow."

Third, the manner for afflicting is widespread. Verse 15 so states: "He has filled me with bitterness, he has sated me with wormwood."

Regarding the insidious manner for afflicting two more ideas are presented. First is the insidious action of enemies. So Verse 10 says: "He is to me like a bear lying in wait, like a lion in hiding." Just like Nabuchodonosor fighting against me (Jeremiah), from ambush (cf. Old Babylon Empire; around 1140 B.C.; or Ruler of New Babylon Empire, around 605-562 B.C.).

Then, Verse 10: "He is to me like a bear": cruel, and "like a lion": in which is designated the above ruler (Nabuchodonosor). As the prophet Hosea relates: "So I will be to them like a lion, like a leopard I will lurk beside the way" (Hos 13:7).

Second, ambushes, or plots of such enemies whom they would repel. As Verse 11: "He led me off my way and tore me to pieces." As expressed in Chapter 1:13 "he has left me stunned, faint all the day long."

Then Verse 12: "He bent his bow and set me as a mark for his arrow." Here is displayed what is publicly and openly added to the very manner.

About this above idea three more notions are added. First is exposed the proposal: "He bent his bow and set me." Namely, like to a judgment, or to an army of enemies. For Psalm 7:12 states: "he has bent and strung his bow". And Job: 16:12: "he seized me by the neck and dashed me to pieces; he set me up as his target."

**Verse 13 ה**

"He drove into my heart the arrows of his quiver;"

**Verse 14 ה**

"I have become the laughing stock of all peoples, the burden of their songs all day long."

**Verse 15 ה**

"He has filled me with bitterness, he has sated me with wormwood."

Here secondly the affliction of penalty says: "He drove into my heart." Namely, by which the luxury of a people is indicated.

Then: "the arrows of his quiver". That is, difference of penalties issuing forth from his governance. As Job 30:11 states: "Because God has loosed my cord and humbled me, they have cast off restraint in my presence."

Third, the delusion of those persons punished is exposed: "I have become the laughing stock of all peoples, the burden of their songs all day long." As elsewhere said: "I have become a laughing stock all the day; every one mocks me." (Jer: 20:7). That is, just as people are accustomed to be derided by others.

Verse 15 then adds: "He has filled me with bitterness, he has sated me with wormwood." Thus is shown how wide is such, and first as to the multitude of penalties. Namely, "he has filled me with bitterness": by different obstacles which is afflicted abundantly (cf. Chapter 41: Jeremiah: "Ishmael and Johanan").

Then, secondly as in Verse 15: "he has sated me with wormwood", That is, regarding the number punished.

**Verse 16 ו**

"He has made my teeth grind on gravel, and made me cower in ashes;"

**Verse 17 ז**

"My soul is bereft of peace, I have forgotten what happiness is;"

**Verse 18 ו**

"So I say, 'Gone is my glory, and my expectation from the Lord".

The afflictions are here pursued. As claimed: "He has made my teeth grind on gravel, and made me cower in ashes." That is, like to the warriors by whom defended, and like to teeth of beasts on gravel. So, nothing remains except in ashes as if worthless. And since Psalm 102 (101):9 declares; "For I eat ashes like bread, and mingle tears with my drink."

Verse 17 then states: "My soul is bereft of peace." Here is assumed a rejection: My soul is bereft": of God's divine mercy. Like Psalm 89(88)':39 declares: "You have renounced the covenant with your servant; you defiled his crown in the dust."

Verse 17 concludes: "I have forgotten what happiness is". Namely, due to the experience of evils. For, Sirach 11:27 claims: "The misery of an hour makes one forget luxury."

Verse 18 states: "So I say, 'Gone is my glory and my expectation from the Lord". That is, like one who concludes in desperation. Also, like one who would claim: since I am amidst obstacles, and the Lord rejects me, He does not aid me. Again: "so, I say": within my heart, like a person in desperation. Thus, in conclusion is said: "Gone is my glory, and my expectation from the Lord".

Such states, as if: I do not accomplish what I had expected. And as Jeremiah 2:25 asserts: "But you said, 'It is hopeless, for I have loved strangers, and after them I will go.'" Also, Malachi 3:14: "You have said 'It is vain to serve God. What is the good of our keeping his

charge or of walking as in mourning before the Lord of hosts?'"

**Verse 19 ז**

"Remember my affliction and my bitterness, the wormwood and the gall!"

**Verse 20 ז**

"My soul continually thinks of it and is bowed down within me";

**Verse 21 ז**

"But this I call to mind, and therefore I have hope."

Here is indicated arguments to wipe out despair. First, by divine mercy, second, be divine justice. As expressed in Verse 34: "To crush under foot all the prisoners of the earth." Third, by divine power. Which Verse 37 expresses: "Who has commanded and it came to pass, unless the Lord has ordained it?"

To the exclusion of despair by divine mercy, two further ideas are exposed. First, is shown mercy regarding a collection of benefits, second regarding a relaxation of punishments. As Verse 31: "For the Lord will not cast off forever."

Referring to divine mercy towards the collection of benefits three more notions are advanced. First is the memory of past benefits, second, the experience of present benefits. Verse 22 so states: "The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases." Third, is the expectation of future benefits. Verse 25 thus states: "The Lord is good to those who wait for him, to the soul that seeks him."

For the memory of past benefits three more ideas are referred to. First, the memory induces prophets towards God, as to a due consideration of evils encountered. While saying: O Lord God you seem dissimulating while forgetting us. So, "remember my affliction": freeing us from affliction, as to loss of possessions. And: "my bitterness": as to my fault that is the cause of so much misery. Also: "the wormwood and the gall," an affliction upon humankind.

Second, memory reduces itself to the benefits the people received. For Verse 20 states: "My soul continually thinks of it", the benefits.

And: "is bowed down within me". That is, memory fails from admiration, or desire. As Psalm 42 (41):4 says: "These things I remember, as I pour out my soul."

Third, memory results regards faithfulness. For Verse 21 claims: "But this I call to mind, and therefore I have hope." Hence Sirach 51:8 says."Then I remembered your mercy, O Lord, and your work from of old."

**Verse 22 ח**

"The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases, his mercies never come to an end;"

**Verse 23 ח**

"They are new every morning; great is your faithfulness."

**Verse 24 ח**

"The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will hope in him".

Presently the experience of divine mercy is exposed. First, to the recognition of divine mercy itself; "The steadfast love of the Lord never ceases, his mercies never come to an end." That is, not punishing, as if unmerciful. Since the Lord punished worthily, not reducing his creations backwards to extinction, or nothingness. Thus, Jeremiah 10:24 declares: "Correct me, O Lord, but in just measure; not in your anger, lest you bring me to nothing."

Second, an approbation from the Lord's divine mercy is indicated. For, Verse 23 says: "They are new every morning; great is your faithfulness." Namely, as I, the Lord God, openly approve. Again: "great is their faithfulness". That is, regarding Jeremiah, who, among your suppliants, acknowledge you. For, the Apostle Matthew reports: "Then Jesus answered her, 'O woman, great is your faith! Be it done for you as you desire'." (Mt: 15:28).

Third, there is an intended conclusion: "The Lord is my portion": my soul says: "Therefore I will hope in him". Namely, since I (Jeremiah) choose his divine mercy in portions while others despise it. As said in Psalm 16 (15):5: "The Lord is my chosen portion and my cup; you hold my lot."

**Verse 25 ט**

"The Lord is good to those who wait for him; to the soul that seeks him;"

**Verse 26 ט**

"It is good that one should wait quietly for the salvation of the Lord,"

**Verse 27 ט**

"It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth."

Divine mercy is here designated as to expectation of future events. First, the expectation itself, second, to the condition of such expectation. As Verse 28: "Let him sit alone in silence when he has laid it on him."

Regarding this expectation of future events three ideas are proposed. First is the result of such an expectation:

"The Lord is good to those who wait for him, to the soul that seeks him." That is, as if spreading proper possessions. Since, Psalm 73 (72):1 claims: "Truly God is good to the upright, to those who are pure in heart."

Second, the manner of this expectation is noticed. As said: "It is good that one should wait quietly for the salvation of the Lord." Namely, patiently, and without a murmur. For Isaiah 30:15 asserts: "in quietness and calm, in trust shall be your strength."

Third, the time of this expectation is examined: "It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth." That is, a fear of the Lord, and love for the Lord in his youth. Since, as the ardor of time is lessened, and youth is more easily led towards virtue. Like Proverbs 22:6: "Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it."

**Verse 28 י**

"Let him sit alone in silence when he has laid it on him;"

**Verse 29 י**

"Let him put his mouth in the dust there may yet be hope;"

**Verse 30 י**

"Let him give his cheek to the smiter, and be filled with insults."

The condition of the person expecting is evaluated. First, regarding a height for contemplation: "Let him sit alone in silence when he has laid it on him." Namely, that he be not impeded by turmoil within thought. Since, through such turmoil, "he had laid it on him." That is, for a consideration of divine favors. As Hosea, the prophet concludes: "Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak tenderly to her." (Hos 2:14). Besides, there is displayed turmoil through a rejection of the person expecting, while such a one awaits. It says: "Let him sit alone in silence." Since, cast aside: "when he has laid it on him."

Second, the condition of the person expecting refers to humbleness of location. Saying: "Let him put his mouth in the dust there may yet be hope." Namely, while humbly speaking. Since Isaiah 29:4 reflects: "Then deep from the earth you shall speak, from low in the dust your words shall come."

Third, the condition of the person expecting can refer to their patience in tribulation. As expressed: "Let him give his cheek to the smiter, and be filled with insults." That is, be prepared to give: "his cheek to the smiter". For the Apostle Matthew states: "but if any one strikes you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also." (Mt: 5:39). Also: "and be filled with insults". Namely, a person should delight, as if being spared some fault by his own action. For, St Paul exclaims to the Romans: "More than that, we rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance". (Rom 5:3). And Isaiah 50:6 asserts: "I gave my 'back to the smiters, and my cheeks to those who pulled out the beard."

**Verse 31 כ**

"For the Lord will not cast off forever;"

**Verse 32 כ**

"But, though he cause grief, he will have compassion according to the abundance of ~his steadfast love."

**Verse 33 כ**

"For he does not willingly afflict or grieve the sons of men."

The divine mercy regarding relaxation of punishments is displayed. So first is considered an absolution from penalties: "For the Lord will not cast off forever". Since, the Lord does not forever punish. Because Psalm 94 (93):14 claims: "For the Lord will not forsake his people; he will not abandon his heritage." And Isaiah 28:28 remarks: "Does one crush bread grain? No, he does not thresh it forever."

Second, divine mercy, in relation to divine piety as to reason, is considered. For, though the Lord causes grief, he will have compassion according "to the abundance of his steadfast love", because, it from such a portion of divine piety (of God the Father) that one punishes in order to correct, then one comforts. For, the Book of Tobit 4:21 states: "Do not be afraid, my son, because we have become poor. You have great wealth, if you fear God and refrain from every sin and do what is pleasing in his sight." Therefore, out of love for humankind is said: "For he does not willingly afflict or grieve the Sons of men." That is, he apportions from his divine love. Since Psalm 36 (35):7 declares: "The children of men take refuge in the shadow of your wings."

**Verse 34 ל**

"To crush under foot all the prisoners of the earth;"

**Verse 35 ל**

"To turn aside the right of a man in the presence of the Most High;"

**Verse 36 ל**

"To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord does not approve."

A contention from divine justice is here advanced. First is eliminated a tyrannical oppression from divine justice. As stated: "To crush under foot": like a tyrant, who externally opposes any judgment. Then: "all the prisoners of the earth". Namely, all those afflicted. To which Psalm 69 (68):33 can refer: "For the Lord hears the needy, and does not despise his own that are in bonds."

Second, perversity of a judge is excluded: "to turn aside the right of man in the presence of the Most High". That is, from rectitude. Add to Verse 36: "the Lord does not approve." And, Job: 34:12: "Of a truth, God will not do wickedly, and the Almighty will not pervert justice."

Third, a perverse intention within divine justice is also excluded. Like to those judges, under a guise of justice, intend to oppress some persons. As said: "To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord does not approve." That is, from judgment: "the Lord does not approve." As Proverbs 4:27 admonishes: "Do not swerve to the right or to the left; turn your foot away from evil."

**Verse 37 מ**

"Who has commanded and it came to pass, unless the Lord has ordained it?"

**Verse 38 מ**

"Is it not from the mouth of the Most High that good and evil come?"

**Verse 39 מ**

"Why should a living man complain, a man, about the punishment of his sins?"

Here arguments are proposed from divine powers by which everything is governed and provided for. First, such is applied against those persons who derogate divine providence, faithless through blasphemy. Verse 37 thus says: "Who has commanded and it came to pass, unless the Lord has ordained it?"

Within this context, heresy is excluded from those who contend God's providence extends itself to universal ideas, and incorporeal things, as celestial bodies. And even up to human kind, due to a conformity of human nature to God, (the Creator).

As Rabbi Maimonides asserts: "here and now, each and all particulars the Lord God does not actually acknowledge". (cf. Moses ben Maimon, (1135-1204 A.D.: Torah and Talmud exegete, author of *Dalalat al ha'irin*: Guide for the Perplexed).

Then, Verse 38 asks: "Is it not from the mouth of the Most High that good and evil come?" Namely from good results prosperity, from bad results adversity. For, in such an idea is excluded the error of those persons who claim everything happens from chance, like Cicero, the Roman philosopher (Marcus Tullius, 106-43 B.C.). However, the apostle and evangelist John 1:3 asserts: "All things were made through him; and without him was not anything made that was made." And the prophet Isaiah 45:7: asserts the Lord God: "I form light and create darkness, I make weal and create woe, I am the Lord, who do all these things."

Second, arguments are advanced regarding divine power against persons who deride the above ideas, through impatience within murmurings. As: "Why should a living man complain; a man, about the punishment of his sins?" Namely, as to his known sins, from which he now suffers. For, Wisdom 1:11 declares: "Beware then of useless murmuring, and keep your tongue from slander."

**Verse 40 נ**

"Let us test and examine our ways, and return to the Lord!"

**Verse 41 נ**

"Let us lift up our hearts and hands to God in heaven;"

**Verse 42 נ**

"We have transgressed and rebelled, and you have not forgiven."

Faith being restored, one now turns to divine mercy. Two further ideas are added to this idea. First, a preparation for prayer is considered, second, the prayer itself. As said: "We have transgressed and rebelled, and you have not forgiven" (Verse 42).

On preparation for prayer, a place is afforded through change of life. As remarked: "Let us test and examine our ways, and return to the Lord." That is, by searching out our past sins. Again: "Let us test and examine our ways." Namely, as to the Lord God, in a desire of our heart seeking divine aid. Then, accepting such one can return to the Lord God by doing good deeds. Since, Jeremiah claims: "know and see that it is evil and bitter for you to forsake the Lord your God" (Jer: 2:19).

Second, a place for prayer is prepared through devotion. As said: "Let us lift up our hearts and hands to God in heaven." For, Paul the Apostle beseeches: "I desire then that in every place the men should pray, lifting holy hands without anger or quarreling" (I Tim: 2:8).

Verse 42 then states: "We have transgressed and rebelled, and you have not forgiven." Here prayer begins, first accenting benevolence, second, the fault. Later Verse 59 thus says: "You have seen the wrong done to me, O Lord; judge my cause."

Third, a place for prayer is prepared, by seeking vindication. For Verse 64 later states: "You will requite them, O Lord, according to the work of their hands."

As to an accent on benevolence three further ideas are proposed. First, benevolence is accented thru their own person, and conquered people; second, as to enemies. For, Verse 46 says: "All our enemies rail against us."

Third, is the person of the judge. As Verse 55 states: "I called on your name, O Lord, from the depths of the pit."

Here Verses 40-42 take into account a benevolence of their own person and people, setting forth their harassments. First, afflictions of people are considered, second compassion. Verse 49 thus says: "My eyes will flow without ceasing, without respite."

Regarding afflictions of people are two further ideas. First, is conferred their fault, lest following punishment, a discretion of a judge is directed. For, Verse 42 claims: "we have transgressed and rebelled, and you have not forgiven." Namely, by sinning against our neighbor. Also: "and rebelled": by sinning against God.

And then: "and you have not forgiven". Since, you, Lord God, are inflexible towards our prayers. Thus, Jeremiah says: "As for you, do not pray for this people, or lift up cry or prayer for them, and do not intercede with me, for I do not hear you" (Jer: 7:16). Also, the apostle John points out: "We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if anyone is a worshiper of God, and does his will, God will listen to him" (Jo 9:31).

Second, regarding the people's afflictions, their sins are exposed.

**Verse 43 ס**

"You wrapped yourself with anger and pursued us, slaying without pity."

**Verse 44 ס**

"You have wrapped yourself with a cloud so that no prayer can pass through;"

**Verse 45 ס**

"You have made us offscouring and refuse among the peoples."

So Verse 43 says: "You have wrapped yourself with anger and pursued us." That is, first by diverse tribulations. And finally: "slaying without pity". For, Proverbs 6:34 claims: "For jealousy makes a man furious, and he will not spare when he takes revenge."

Second, is a refusal from prayer of a person sinning. Verse 44 thus says: "You have wrapped yourself with a cloud", Namely, regarding such sins displaying faults against prayer. Thus, Isaiah 59:2 claims: "But your iniquities have made a separation between you and your God."

Third, the dispersion of persons is exposed: "You have made us offscouring and refuse among the peoples." Namely, like eradicating persons from a firm protection. So, Wisdom 4:4 declares: "and by the violence of the winds they will be uprooted."

**Verse 46 פ**

"All our enemies rail against us."

**Verse 47 פ**

Panic and pitfall have come upon us, devastation and destruction;"

**Verse 48 פ**

"My eyes flow with rivers of tears because of the destruction of the daughter of my people."

Benevolence on the enemy's part, excitement against indications of evil inflicted by the enemy, are here viewed. First is noticed the preparation for capturing, second, the captivity itself. Thus, Verse 52 states: "I have been hunted like a bird by those who were my enemies without cause."

To the idea, preparation for capturing, three more references are made. First is the enemies' preparation: "All our enemies rail against us". (Verse 46). That is, as if to devour us. So Psalm 22 (21):13 says: "They open wide their mouths at me, like a ravening and roaring lion."

Second, there is a description of prophets whom they ought to be protected against their enemies. Since Verse 47 says: "panic and pitfall have come upon us, devastation and destruction." That is, sheer panic, as cause of fear before captivity. And, "pitfall": within such captivity.

Then: "devastation": after the captivity and "destruction": from false prophets. For Isaiah 24:17 says: "Terror, and the pit, and the snare are upon you, O inhabitants of the earth!"

Third, compassion is considered. As: "My eyes flow with rivers of tears because of the destruction of the daughter of my people." Namely, as one imploring, due to singular miseries. Thus Psalm 119 (118): 136 expresses: "My eyes shed streams of tears, because men do not keep your law."

It must 'be observed here that the three Verses 46-48 (according to some scriptural exegetes) ought to be placed before the Verses 43-45. So then the Hebrew letter "Phe" would be placed before the letter "Am", according to an accustomed order.

**Verse 49 ע**

"My eyes will flow without ceasing, without respite;"

**Verse 50 ע**

"Until the Lord from heaven looks down and sees;"

**Verse 51 ע**

"My eyes cause me grief at the fate of all the maidens of my city."

The compassion of the prophet is here exposed. First is the exterior lamentation: "My eyes will flow without ceasing, without respite." Namely, crying: "without ceasing,": from tears: "without respite": from tribulation for the people. For Jeremiah 9:18-19 asserts: "And our eyelids gush with water. For a sound of wailing is heard from Zion."

There is then a final lamentation: "Until the Lord of heaven looks down and sees." Namely, with his eyes of divine mercy. Since Psalm 102 (101):19 says: "That he looked down from his holy height, from heaven the Lord looked at the earth."

Second is the compassion of the prophet, due to the sting from interior grief: "My eyes cause me grief at the fate of all the maidens of my city." That is: "my eyes," seeing the depredation upon the earth, "cause me grief". That is, spoiling the earth from delight. Or, lamenting exteriorly, the prophet gives himself up to a total grief within his own heart.

**Verse 52 צ**

"I have been hunted like a bird by those who were my enemies without cause;"

**Verse 53 צ**

"They flung me alive into the pit and cast stones on me;"

**Verse 54 צ**

"Water closed over my head; I said, 'I am lost'."

The affliction into which people fall is now evaluated. First, the people's captivity itself is reckoned: I have been hunted like a bird." That is, as if by cunning enemies, operating with powers.

Then, enemies (the Chaldeans) are: "without cause". For, I (Jeremiah) could, in no manner, harm them, since they, in no way approach me. So, Isaiah 52:4 says: "and the Assyrian oppressed them for nothing." Elsewhere, Jeremiah declares: "and afterwards I will send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain and every hill". (Jer: 16:16).

Second, the imprisonment of the captives is explained: "They flung me alive into the pit". That is, my life into a prison of captivity. For, Psalm 88 (87):6 states: "You put me in the depths of the Pit, in the regions dark and deep."

Third, the very imprisonment of those imprisoned is exposed: "Water closed over my head; I said, 'I am lost'". Namely, the waters of tribulations are multiplied. Again: "I said, 'I am lost'". That is, desperately and impatiently. As the prophet Jonas reports: "All

Your waves and your billows passed over me" (Jonas 2:3).

**Verse 55 ק**

"I called on your name, O Lord, from the depths of the pit;"

**Verse 56 ק**

"You heard my plea, 'Do not close your ear to my cry for help';"

**Verse 57 ק**

"You came near when I called on you; you said, 'Do not fear'."

The benevolence, on the part of the person, the judge, is displayed here. First is shown his mercy towards miserable people, second, the justice of the judge. Verse 58 thus says: "You took up my cause, O Lord, you redeemeded my life."

Regarding mercy toward miserable people, three more ideas are set forth. First is a prayer for such miserable persons: "I called on your name, O Lord, from the depths of the pit." Namely, like one existing with difficulties.

And: "from the depths of the pit". Just like the greatest tribulation in Egypt, as recorded in the Book of Judges. Also, as Sirach (Ecclesiasticus) 51:10 declares: "I appealed to the Lord, the Father of my Lord, not to for- sake me in the days of affliction."

Second, the mercy from prayer is then referred to: "You heard my plea, 'Do not close your ear to my cry for help'."

Third, the consolation from the prayer heard is remembered: "You came near when I called on you; you said, 'Do not fear'." Namely, confirming me (Jeremiah) by your divine aid (O Lord God), then, as now. For Job 17:3 declares: "Lay down a pledge for me with yourself; who is there that will give surety for me?"

**Verse 58 ר**

"You took up my cause, O Lord, you redeemed my life."

**Verse 59 ר**

"You see the wrong done to me, O Lord; judge my cause;"

**Verse 60 ר**

"You saw all their vengeance, all their devices against me."

Here the judge and his justice is commended: "You took up my cause, O Lord, you redeemed my life." That is, during past times. As concurs Psalm 43 (42):1: "Vindicate me, O God, and defend my cause against an ungodly people."

Then Verse 59 continues: "You see the wrong done to me, O Lord; judge my cause." The benevolence of the divine judge is here accounted for.

Besides, an accusation regarding the adversary is proposed. So, first is an accusation against the evil within the deed. Thus is said: "You see the wrong done to me, O Lord." This states as if: they are unable to deny what is known to you, (O Lord God). For, Lamentations 1:22 makes known: "Let all their evil doing come before you; and deal with them as you have dealt with me."

Second, an accusation, as to the fury in the enemy's heart is underscored: "You see all their vengeance, all their devices against me." For Jeremiah 18:18 reports: "Then they said 'Come, let us make plots against Jeremiah, for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet."

Third, is an accusation regarding sin from their mouth: "You heard their taunts, O Lord, all their devices against me."

**Verse 61 ש**

"You heard their taunts, O Lord, all their devices against me."

**Verse 62 ש**

"The lips and thoughts of my assailants are against me all the day long."

**Verse 63 ש**

"Behold their sitting and their rising; I am the burden of their songs."

The people here are accused of their sins. First, regarding the affliction in their shame: "You heard their taunts, O Lord, all their devices against me." Which declares, as if: there is no need for proof. For the prophet Daniel 9:16 asserts: "And for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and your people have become a byword among all who are round about us.

Second, such is insofar as to threats: "The lips and thoughts of my assailants are against me all the day long." As Psalm 38 (37):12 says: "those who seek my hurt speak of ruin, and meditate treachery all the day long."

Third, (their shame) is, insofar as to derision, and insult: "Behold their sitting and their rising; I am the burden of their songs." For, they sit in council, in order to destroy me by: "their rising". And: "I am the burden of their songs". Since, they compose derisive songs against me."

All the above notions can be understood in the person of the prophet, or the people themselves, as first mentioned. For, Job 30:9 declares: "And now I have become their song, I am a byword to them." Also, Psalm: 69 (68):12: "and the drunkards make songs about me."

**Verse 64 ת**

"You will requite them, O Lord, according to the work of their hands,"

**Verse 65 ת**

"You will give them dullness of heart; your curse will be on them."

**Verse 66 ת**

"You will pursue them in anger and destroy them from under your heavens, O Lord."

Vindication from adversaries is here sought. This is due to a security from' prayers heard, and vindication considered. Such is also from their foretelling, than their praying.

Thus, two more notions are given: "You will requite them, O Lord, according to the work of their hands." Namely, as to their penalties. For, Psalm 28 (27):24 states: "Requite them according, to their work, and according to the evil of their deeds."

Second, a determination of their penalty is evaluated. First, regards its duration: "You will give them dullness of heart; your curse will be on them." Namely, the sin by which they made you labor.

Besides, Isaiah 1:14 claims: "I am weary of bearing them." That is, since you (O Lord) restore a shield against their sins from their heart. So that, they are not to be penetrated by arrows of divine grace, and the sword of your word (O Lord). Hence Job 41:15 can say: "His back is made of rows of shields, shut up closely as with a seal."

Third, the determination of penalty to their 'body is accounted for: "You will pursue them in anger and destroy them from under your heavens, O Lord." That is, through different afflictions."

Finally, is considered up to the time you (O Lord) destroy them by death, and eternal damnation. That is" under your heaven O Lord. Namely, those persons who would desire to reside in these heavens. For, Jeremiah elsewhere declares: "Bring upon them the day of evil; destroy them with double destruction!" (Jer 17:18). And Psalm 83 (82):15: "So do you pursue them with your tempest and terrify them with your hurricane."
