# Lecture 2

^1:2^ Beth. Weeping she has wept in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks: there is none to comfort her among all them that were dear to her: all her friends have despised her, and are become her enemies.  

> **2**. Here he weeps over the violation of friendship.

And first, he shows the necessity of friends: ***weeping***, as if Jerusalem were continually pressed by various adversaries; ***in the night***, in private for fear of enemies, or in adversity; ***on her cheeks***, because there was no one to wipe her tears away. *Every night I will wash my bed: I will water my couch with my tears* (Ps 6:7).  

Second, the withdrawal of aid: ***there is none to comfort her***, by offering help against her enemies; ***among all them that were dear to her***, the Egyptians and her other allies. *I saw the oppressions that are done under the sun, and the tears of the innocent, and they had no comforter* (Eccl 4:1).  

Third, the change of affections: ***all her friends***. *He has put my brethren far from me, and my acquaintance like strangers have departed from me* (Job 19:13).  

At the top of this verse is placed the letter, ***beth***, which is translated “house,” because the house of Jacob is weeping.  

This is the thirteenth topic of complaint. *(“The thirteenth is one used when we complain with great indignation that we are ill-treated by those by whom above all others we least ought to be so—as by our relations, or by friends whom we have served, and whom we have expected to be assistants to us; or by whom it is a shameful thing to be ill-treated—as by slaves, or freedmen, or clients or suppliants” (Cicero, *De inventione* 1.55).)*  

Allegorically, the Church weeps over her adversities, ***on her cheeks***: the prelates; ***among all them that were dear to her***: the holy angels; ***have despised her***: for complying with divine justice.  

Morally, the soul weeps, ***in the night***: her sins; ***on her cheeks***: conscience, in which the action of man speaks; ***among all them that were dear to her***: private affections; ***have despised*** the affections of depraved enjoyment.
