# Lecture 15

^1:15^ Samech. The Lord has taken away all my mighty men out of the midst of me: he has called against me the time, to destroy my chosen men: the Lord has trodden the winepress for the virgin daughter of Judah.  

> **15**. Here he describes in detail the misery of servitude.

And first, as regards the first captivity under Jekoniah, the grandson of Josiah (2 Kgs 24:13–14).  

Second, as regards the last captivity, which was under Zedekiah (2 Kgs 25:1, 20–21, and Jer 52:28–30), at ***Zion has spread forth her hands*** (Lam 1:17).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

Because first, he weeps over the captivity of men;  

second, over the withdrawal of consolation, at ***therefore am I weeping, and my eyes run down with water*** (Lam 1:16).  

Concerning the first, he does three things.  

First, he presents the captivity of those who were eminent in dignity: ***mighty men***, princes, to whom it belongs to do great things; because, with the others remaining behind, these were taken away into captivity. *The Lord of hosts shall take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah the valiant and the strong* (Isa 3:1).  

Second, those who were eminent in virtue: ***he has called against me the time***, apt for destruction, ***to destroy my chosen men***, pre-eminent in virtue. *When I shall take a time, I will judge justices* (Ps 74:3). *In the day of revenge I will visit this sin also of theirs* (Exod 32:34). *All things have their season* (Eccl 3:1).  

Third, the affliction of those who were pre-eminent in purity, or even in piety; ***the winepress***, that is, affliction, ***for the virgin daughter***, either literally or for the people themselves, who were until then like a virgin, who were also made captive. *The shout, as it were, of them that tread grapes shall be given out against all the inhabitants of the earth* (Jer 25:30).  

Here is where the letter *(I.e., the letter that precedes each new verse. There is not always agreement as to the proper division of the verses.)* ought to be prefixed according to the Gloss; but it is better that it is prefixed in what follows, because it proceeds by threes.
