# Lecture 12

^1:12^ Lamed. O all you that pass by the way, attend, and see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow: for he has made a vintage of me, as the Lord spoke in the day of his fierce anger.  

> **12**. Here he presents the complaint on the part of the city herself and of the people.

And first, she complains to those present about the severity of the judge;  

second, she complains to the judge about the cruelty of her enemy, at ***behold, O Lord, for I am in distress*** (Lam 1:20).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he presents the severity of the judge in general;  

second, he describes it in particular, at ***the Lord has taken away all my mighty men*** (Lam 1:15).  

Concerning the first, he does three things.  

First, he presents the indignation of God, inasmuch as by punishing he took vengeance;  

second, he presents the severity of the divine discipline, inasmuch as by punishing he educated, at ***from above he has sent fire*** (Lam 1:13);  

third, he presents the rigor of justice, inasmuch as by punishing he exercised the office of a judge, at ***the yoke of my iniquities has watched*** (Lam 1:14).  

Concerning the first, he does three things.  

First, he presents an invocation: ***O all you who pass by the way***, of this deserted region. *And many nations shall pass by this city: and they shall say every man to his neighbor: why has the Lord done so to this great city?* (Jer 22:8).  

Second, he presents the magnitude of the pain: ***attend***, because while she considers her pain, she thinks there is nothing similar to it. For this was very great because of her very great losses, spiritual and temporal. *For the affliction of Jerusalem I am afflicted* (Jer 8:21).  

Third, he presents the indignation of God, which is the reason for the pain, because ***he has made a vintage of me***: the inhabitants taken captive and killed, like a grape vine. *For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel* (Isa 5:7). *So that all they who pass by the way do pluck it* (Ps 79:13)*. **As the Lord spoke***, by threatening through the prophets.
