# Lecture 1

^1:1b^ Aleph. How does the city sit solitary that was full of people! The mistress of the gentiles has become as a widow: the princes of provinces made tributary!  

> **1**. This book is divided into two parts.

In the first part, the prophet deplores the misfortune of the people;  

in the second, he turns in prayer toward the divine mercy: ***remember, O Lord, what is come upon us*** (Lam 5:1).  

The first part is divided into three.  

In the first, he weeps over the misfortune of their slavery;  

in the second, over the misfortune of their destruction: ***how has the Lord covered with obscurity the daughter of Zion in his wrath*** (Lam 2:1);  

in the third, over the misfortune of the siege: ***how has the gold become dim*** (Lam 4:1).  

The first is in two parts.  

In the first, the prophet deplores the abasement of his people;  

in the second, he introduces the complaint of the people or of the conquered city, at ***O all you that pass by*** (Lam 1:12).  

The first is in two parts.  

In the first, he laments their servitude;  

in the second, he describes in detail the greatness of their slavery, at ***Judah has removed her dwelling place*** (Lam 1:3).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he shows the servitude of the people or their abjection as regards the loss of glory (Lam 1:1);  

second, as regards the violation of friendship, at ***weeping she has wept*** (Lam 1:2).  

He shows her loss of glory from three things.  

First, because of the populousness of her citizens: ***how does the city sit***, debased and dejected, ***solitary***, forsaken by her inhabitants. *For I am left alone. I have put off the robe of peace* (Bar 4:19–20). ***That was full of people***, in former times. *Judah and Israel were innumerable* (1 Kgs 4:20). *A populous city, a joyous city* (Isa 22:2).  

Second, because of the honor of her princes, for she was a royal and priestly city: ***the mistress of the gentiles become as a widow*** in regard to the rulers or priests. *These two things will come upon you suddenly in one day, barrenness and widowhood* (Isa 47:9). ***The mistress of the gentiles***, who were formerly subject to her. *This is Jerusalem, I have set her in the midst of the nations* (Ezek 5:5).  

Third, because she was enriched with tributes: ***the princes of provinces***, which rendered tributes. *And Moab, and Syria, was made to serve David under tribute* (2 Sam 8:2, 6). Or amongst whom Solomon had divided his kingdom, putting one governor in charge of each province (1 Kgs 4:7). ***Made tributary***, to the Chaldeans. *The hand of the valiant will bear rule: but that which is slothful, will be under tribute* (Prov 12:24).  

At the top of this verse is placed the letter, ***aleph***, which is interpreted as “doctrine” in order to show that it is because the people failed in the observance of the doctrine of God, of which they had knowledge, that they were placed in captivity. *Therefore is my people led away captive, because they had not knowledge* (Isa 5:13).  

It should also be known that, since he frequently uses rhetorical topics and colors in this lamentation, this is the fourth topic of complaint. *(These terms are derived from classical Ciceronian rhetoric. According to Cicero: “The fourth topic is one in which all circumstances which are discreditable or low or mean are brought forward; all circumstances which are unworthy of a man’s age, or birth, or fortune, or former honors or services; all the disasters which they have suffered or are liable to suffer” (Cicero, *De inventione*, trans. C. D. Yonge [1853], 1.55).)*  

Allegorically, ***the city*** signifies the present Church; ***full of people***: gathered from diverse nations; ***mistress of the gentiles***: obedient to the faith; ***princes of provinces***: of diverse churches, for which she decrees the way of living; ***has become*** . . . ***solitary***: deprived of the protection or aid of the angels; ***a widow***: because the presence of her spouse has been taken away; ***made tributary***: exposed to tyrants.  

Morally, ***the city*** signifies the soul; ***full of people***: of good affections; ***mistress of the gentiles***: of vices; ***princes of provinces***, the senses; ***forsaken***, *(In the Latin, the connection between *sola* and *desolata* is stronger than the translations of “solitary” and “forsaken” convey in the English. The text of Lamentations speaks more explicitly of the city as *desolata*, “forsaken,” below at Lamentations 1:13.)* by the judgments of the good; ***a widow***, from the embrace of her spouse; ***made tributary***, of vices.
