# Lecture 8

^1:8^ Heth. Jerusalem has grievously sinned, therefore is she become unstable: all that honored her have despised her, because they have seen her shame: but she sighed and turned backward.  

> **8**. Here he shows the cause of so great a misfortune.

And first, he presents the sin itself;  

second, the progression of the sin, at ***her filthiness is on her feet*** (Lam 1:9).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he presents the sin: ***sin***, substituting this word *(*Antonomasia*, which is a figure of speech (in particular, a type of metonymy) in which an epithet or other name or phrase is used instead of the proper name or word.)* for infidelity and idolatry. *Sin makes nations miserable* (Prov 14:34).  

Second, he presents the effect of sin.  

First, the misery of instability: ***therefore is she become unstable***, that is, she does not stand on her land but was taken captive and fled into foreign regions. *The wicked are like the raging sea, which cannot rest* (Isa 57:20).  

Second, the shame of confusion: ***all that honored her***—they blessed her at the time of her prosperity; ***have despised her, because they have seen her shame***, of adversity. *The ear that heard me blessed me, and the eye that saw me gave witness to me* (Job 29:11).  

Third, the sadness of the heart: ***but she sighed and turned backward***, away from the prosperity which she had enjoyed in God*. Let them be turned backward and be ashamed that desire evils to me* (Ps 39:15).
