# Lecture 2

^2:2^ Beth. The Lord has cast down headlong, and has not spared, all that was beautiful in Jacob: he has destroyed in his wrath the strongholds of the virgin of Judah, and brought them down to the ground: he has made the kingdom unclean, and the princes thereof.  

> **24**. Here he describes in particular what happened concerning the destruction.

And first, he weeps over the things connected to the destruction;  

second, over what followed the destruction, at ***to what shall I compare you?*** (Lam 2:13).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he weeps over the destruction of ordinary buildings;  

second, of eminent buildings, at ***he has destroyed his tent as a garden*** (Lam 2:6).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he weeps over the destruction of buildings relating to the strength of the king;  

second, over the destruction of those pertaining to the use of the people, at ***he has bent his bow*** (Lam 2:4).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he weeps over the destruction;  

second, over the impotence of the defenders, at ***he has broken in his fierce anger*** (Lam 2:3).  

Concerning the first, he does three things.  

First, he weeps over the destruction of those things which are for beauty: ***all that was beautiful**. Fire has devoured the beautiful places of the wilderness* (Joel 1:19).  

Second, over the destruction of those things pertaining to strength: ***he has destroyed the strongholds***. *And the bulwarks of your high walls shall fall and be brought low and shall be pulled down to the ground, even to the dust* (Isa 25:12). *For thus says the Lord the God of Israel to the houses of this city, and to the houses of the king of Judah, which are destroyed* (Jer 33:4).  

Third, he concludes by weeping over the defilement of the kingdom: ***he has made the kingdom unclean***. *They shall defile your beauty. They shall kill you, and bring you down: and you shall die the death of them that are slain in the heart of the sea* (Ezek 28:7–8).
