# Lecture 19

^2:19^ Coph. Arise, praise God in the night, in the beginning of the watches: pour out your heart like water before the face of the Lord: lift up your hands to him for the souls of your little children, that have fainted for hunger at the top of all the streets.  

> **41**. Here he teaches how to pray; and concerning this, he does two things.

First, he teaches how to pray as regards the time: ***arise***, from sleep; ***praise God***, by prayer; ***in the night***, when the time is less occupied, and because of the tranquility of the time; ***in the beginning of the watches***. The night watches differed according to the guard of those who guarded the city, as is said in the Song of Songs 3:3: *the watchmen who keep the city found me*. There were four watches. The first is called, *conticinium*, when the fire is covered. *(*Conticinium* signifies the first part of the night, when all becomes still; the noun is derived from *conticescere*, to become still.)* The second is called, *intempestum*, which is around midnight, because that time is unsuitable for doing anything, for indeed, among the ancients, *tempestum* means “suitable.” The third watch is called, *galli cantus*, “the crowing of the cock.” The fourth is called, *antelucanum*, “before dawn.” So he says to arise ***in the beginning of the watches***, that is, either in the first watch or in the beginning of any of the watches. *My soul has desired thee in the night: yea, and with my spirit within me in the morning early I will watch to thee* (Isa 26:9).  

And as regards the devotion of the heart, he says: ***pour out your heart like water***, as if it were melted by love and devotion, as water that had been frozen. *These things I remembered, and poured out my soul in me* (Ps 41:5).  

And as regards the sign of devotion, he says: ***lift up your hands to him***. *I will therefore that men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands, without anger and contention* (1 Tim 2:8).  

Second, he presents the subject of prayer: ***for the souls***, that is, for the separation of souls from bodies, or ***soul*** stands for life itself; ***at the top of the streets***, that is, at the crossroads where four roads meet. ***When the children and the sucklings fainted away in the streets of the city*** (Lam 2:11).
