# Lecture 10

^2:10^ Jod. The ancients sit upon the ground, they have held their peace; the daughters of Zion have sprinkled their heads with ashes; the virgins of Jerusalem are girded with haircloth; the virgins of Judah hang down their heads to the ground. *(This is a translation of the text Thomas Aquinas was working with. The Douay-Rheims translation of the Vulgate reads as follows: *Jod. The ancients of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, they have held their peace: they have sprinkled their heads with dust, they are girded with haircloth, the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground*.)*  

> **32**. Here he weeps over the destruction of those who are miserable on account of their reverend condition.

First, the elders: ***the ancients sit upon the ground, they have held their peace***, which are signs of great sadness*. And they sat with him on the ground for six days, and no man spoke to him a word: for they saw that his grief was very great* (Job 2:13).  

Second, as regards the virgins: ***the daughters of Zion***, who were in the citadel, or, adjoining the temple, the daughters of the priests; ***have sprinkled***, in sign of sorrow; ***the virgins of Jerusalem***, those who lived in the city, ***are girded with haircloth***; ***the virgins of Judah***, those who lived all over the kingdom, ***hang down their heads to the ground***, for shame and fear. *And instead of a sweet smell there shall be stench, and instead of a girdle, a cord, and instead of curled hair, baldness* (Isa 3:24).
