# Lecture 6

^2:6^ Vau. And he has destroyed his tent as a garden, he has thrown down his tabernacle: the Lord has caused feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion; and has delivered up king and priest to reproach, and to the indignation of his wrath.  

> **28**. Here he weeps over the destruction of the principal buildings.

And first, of the temple;  

second, of the house of the king, at ***the Lord has purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion*** (Lam 2:8).  

The first is divided in two parts.  

First, he touches upon the destruction of the temple itself;  

second, that of the objects that were in the temple, at ***the Lord has cast off his altar*** (Lam 2:7).  

Concerning the first, he does three things.  

First, he touches upon the destruction of the temple: ***his tent***, which had been made in the desert and was installed at Shiloh; ***his tabernacle***, which was built by Solomon; ***as a garden***, which is easy to destroy. *And he put away the tabernacle of Shiloh, his tabernacle where he dwelt among men* (Ps 77:60). *I will make this house like Shiloh: and I will make this city a curse* (Jer 26:6).  

Second, the cessation of the festivals of the temple: ***the Lord has caused feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion***, as if they do not please him as before. *My soul hates your new moons, and your solemnities* (Isa 1:14).  

Third, the reprobation of its ministers: ***and has to reproach***, that is, he delivered up, ***king***, to whom pertained the defense of the temple, ***and priest***, to whom pertained its administration*. He leads away priests without glory, and overthrows nobles* (Job 12:19).
