# Lecture 14

^2:14^ Nun. Your prophets have seen false and foolish things for you: and they have not laid open your iniquity, to excite you to penance: but they have seen for you false assumptions and banishments.  

> **36**. Here he assigns the cause of its incurability, because the physicians of the time, namely, the prophets, neglected to treat her.

And first, he shows the falsity of the prophets as regards the false things they predicted: ***your prophets have seen***, that is, they said they had seen; ***false and foolish things***: because it was foolish to believe that God would not punish sinners. *Her prophets have daubed them without tempering the mortar* (Ezek 22:28). *But there were also false prophets among the people, even as there shall be among you lying teachers* (2 Pet 2:1). And as regards the things they did not say, ***and they have not laid open your iniquity***. *Cry, cease not, lift up your voice like a trumpet, and show my people their wicked doings* (Isa 58:1).  

Second, he explains the kind of things seen in their false visions: ***but they have seen for you false assumptions***, namely, overwhelming burdens, as a burden carried higher weighs one down the more. *Thus says the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err* (Micah 3:5). ***Banishments***, liberations. *Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon after two full years of days* (Jer 28:11). Or ***assumptions***, that God would take you to himself; ***banishments***, that their enemies would be expelled.
