# Lecture 9

^2:9^ Teth. Her gates are sunk into the ground: he has destroyed, and broken her bars: her king and her princes are in the gentiles: the law is no more, and her prophets have found no vision from the Lord.  

> **31**. Here he weeps over the destruction of men.

And first of all, of those whose misfortune is more intensely miserable according to the degree of their dignity;  

second, of those whose misfortune is miserable because of reverence for their condition, at ***the ancients sit upon the ground, they have held their peace*** (Lam 2:10);  

third, of those whose misfortune is miserable because of their lack of years, at ***my eyes have failed with weeping*** (Lam 2:11).  

Concerning the first, he makes two points.  

First, as regards the temporal princes, he uses a parable or metaphor: ***her gates are sunk into the ground***, that is, they have been so wrapped up in tribulations that they cannot easily escape. *I stick fast in the mire of the deep: and there is no sure standing* (Ps 68:3). ***Her gates*** represents kings, to whom belonged the power of judgment, which was exercised at the gates; ***he has destroyed***, by capturing, ***and broken***, by leading into captivity, ***her bars***, the princes, by whom the kingdom was strengthened, as a door by its bars. And he explains: ***her king and her princes are in the gentiles***, that is, among the gentiles. *He has broken gates of brass, and burst the iron bars* (Ps 106:16). *Her gates shall lament and mourn, and she shall sit forsaken on the ground* (Isa 3:26).  

Second, as regards the spiritual princes, namely, the priests: ***the law is no more***, to be taught by the priests. *The lips of the priest shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his mouth* (Mal 2:7). And the prophets: ***and her prophets have found no vision from the Lord***. *There is now no prophet: and he will know us no more* (Ps 73:9).
