# Lecture 18

^2:18^ Sade. Their heart cried to the Lord upon the walls of the daughter of Zion: let tears run down like a torrent day and night: give yourself no rest, and let not the apple of your eye cease.  

> **40**. Here he turns to imploring the mercy of the judge through prayer).

And first, he summons to prayer;  

second, he presents the prayer, at ***behold, O Lord, and consider*** (Lam 2:20).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he teaches to prepare the place of prayer by tears;  

second, he teaches how to pray, at ***arise, praise God*** (Lam 2:19).  

Concerning the first, he does three things.  

First, he presents the reason for mourning: ***their heart***, that of their enemies; ***cried***, in blaspheming; ***to the Lord***, that is, against him; ***upon the walls***, as if the destruction of the city were an opportunity for blasphemy, as if God had not been able to defend it. *Your murmuring is not against us, but against the Lord* (Exod 16:8). Or ***their heart*** refers to that of the Jews: that he might teach them to express the sorrow of their hearts in tearful prayer*. I cried with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord* (Ps 118:145).  

Second, he invites them to shed an abundance of tears: ***let tears run down like a torrent. Let our eyes shed tears, and our eyelids run down with waters* (Jer 9:18).  

Third, he invites them to mourn continuously: ***day and night***, that is, in prosperity and in adversity: or literally, at all times, actually or habitually. *Let my eyes shed down tears night and day* (Jer 14:17). *  
*
