# Lecture 11

^2:11^ Caph. My eyes have failed with weeping, my bowels are troubled: my liver is poured out upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people, when the children and the sucklings fainted away in the streets of the city.  

> **33**. Here he weeps over those who are miserable because of their lack of years.

And first, he touches upon their death;  

second, the course of their death, at ***they said to their mothers*** (Lam 2:12).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he shows his compassion by his shedding of tears: ***my eyes have failed***, as if they could not cry anymore. *Who will give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my eyes?* (Jer 9:1). By the turbulence of his innards: ***my bowels are troubled***, as if to say, “I suffer so much, it is like the pain of turbulent innards,” or because the pain penetrated even to the bottom of his heart. *Therefore are my bowels troubled for him* (Jer 31:20). As regards the pouring out of the liver: ***my liver is poured out upon the earth***: that is, I suffer as if it had been poured out, or because my love, whose seat is in the liver, has been thrown to the ground, laying prostrate with those whom I love. *I will rend the inner parts of their liver* (Hos 13:8).  

Second, he shows the mercy of his compassion: ***for the destruction of the city***, that is, of Jerusalem, because she was made vile, or of any other. *And with you I will break in pieces the old man and the child, the young man and the virgin* (Jer 51:22).
