# Lecture 14

***^3:40^ Nun. Let us search our ways, and let us seek and return to the Lord.***

> ^3:41^ Nun. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to the Lord in the heavens.

> ^3:42^ Nun. We have done wickedly, and provoked you to wrath: therefore you are inexorable.

> **58**. Here now, having taken confidence, he begins to implore the divine mercy; and concerning this, he does two things.

First, he presents the preparation for prayer;  

second, there is the prayer, at ***we have done wickedly*** (Lam 3:42).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, a place for prayer is prepared through the amendment of life: ***let us search our ways***, by inspecting our past sins; ***and let us seek***, the Lord, by the desire of the heart; and asking for help and having received it, ***let us return***, by acting well. *See your ways in the valley, know what you have done* (Jer 2:23).  

Second, the place is prepared by devotion: ***let us lift up our hearts***. *I will therefore that men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands* (1 Tim 2:8).  

***We have done wickedly***. Here begins the prayer:  

and first, he seeks to capture good will;  

second, he denounces their fault, at ***you have seen, O Lord, their iniquity*** (Lam 3:59);  

third, he claims vengeance, at ***you shall render them a recompense*** (Lam 3:64).  

Concerning the first, he does three things.  

First, he captures good will in his own person and that of the lamenting people;  

second, in the person of their adversaries, at ***all our enemies have opened their mouths against us*** (Lam 3:46);  

third, from the person of the judge, at ***I have called upon your name, O Lord*** (Lam 3:55).  

He captures good will in his own person and in the name of the people by setting forth their misfortunes: whence concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he sets forth the affliction of the people;  

second, his own compassion, at ***my eye is afflicted*** (Lam 3:49).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he confesses their fault, lest the punishment to follow should incline toward the cruelty of the judge: ***wickedly***, by sinning against neighbor; ***provoked you to wrath***, by sinning against God; ***you are inexorable***, because you are not turning toward our prayers. *Therefore, do you not pray for this people, and do not take up praise and prayer for them: for I will not hear them* (Jer 11:14)*. God does not hear sinners: but if a man be a server of God, him he hears* (John 9:31).  

Second, he sets forth their sin.
