# Lecture 10

^3:28^ Jod. He shall sit solitary and hold his peace, because he has raised himself above himself. *(Alternatively: *he has taken it up upon himself*.)*  

> ^3:29^ Jod. He shall put his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.

> ^3:30^ Jod. He shall give his cheek to him that strikes him: he shall be filled with reproaches.

> **54**. Here he puts the condition of the one who waits.

And first, as regards the depth of his contemplation: ***solitary***, so as not to be disturbed; ***he shall hold his peace***, away from the tumult of thoughts and desires; ***because***, by this, ***he has raised himself above himself***, to contemplate divine things. *I will lead her into the wilderness: and I will speak to her heart* (Hos 2:14). Or in this he shows the abasement of the one who waits, because he remains in expectation: ***he shall sit solitary and hold his peace***, because humiliated, and he shall ***raise himself***, in pride.  

Second, as regards the humility of his speech: ***he shall put his mouth in the dust***, by speaking humbly. *Your speech shall be heard out of the ground* (Isa 29:4).  

Third, as regards his endurance of tribulation: ***he shall give his cheek to him that strikes him***, or at least be ready to give it*. If one strike you on your right cheek, turn to him also the other* (Matt 5:39). ***He shall be filled***, he will delight in it, as it were, hoping for this favor. *Not only so: but we glory also in tribulations* (Rom 5:3)*. I have given my body to the strikers, and my cheeks to them that plucked them* (Isa 50:6).
