# Lecture 16

***^3:46^ Phe. All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.***

> ^3:47^ Phe. Prophecy has become to us a fear, and a snare, and destruction.

> ^3:48^ Phe. My eye has run down with streams of water, for the destruction of the daughter of my people.

> **60**. Here he captures good will on the part of his adversary, by provoking indignation against him because of the evils that he has brought upon them.

And first, there is the preparation for capture;  

second, the captivity itself, at ***my enemies have chased me*** (Lam 3:52).  

Concerning the first, he does three things.  

First, the preparation of their enemies: ***enemies have opened***, as if ready to devour. *They have opened their mouths against me, as a lion ravening and roaring* (Ps 21:14).  

Second, the deception of the prophets is presented, by whom they should have been fortified against their enemies: ***a fear***, the cause of fear before captivity; ***and a snare***, in being captured; ***destruction***, after being captured; ***prophecy***, of false prophets. *Fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon you, O you inhabitant of the earth* (Isa 24:17).  

Third, his compassion is presented: ***streams***, as if crying over each and every misfortune. *My eyes have sent forth springs of water* (Ps 118:136).  

But it should be known that the next three verses, according to some, ought to be placed before these preceding ones, since it is contrary to the usual custom for the letter, ***phe***, to be before the letter, ***ain***.
