# Lecture 2

***^3:4^ Beth. My skin and my flesh he has made old, he has broken my bones.***

> ^3:5^ Beth. He has built round about me, and he has compassed me with gall and labor.

> ^3:6^ Beth. He has set me in dark places as those that are dead forever.

> **46**. Here he presents the effect of the divine scourging, as a bruise is the effect of the rod; and concerning this, he does three things.

First, the wasting away of the men in the whole people: because the ***skin***, in which the people are signified, standing as if toward the outside; and the ***flesh***, in which are signified those who are delicate and frail; the ***bones***, in which are signified the strong men and warriors of the people—that is, the whole people—dries up with age. *How does it happen, O Israel, that you are in your enemies’ land? You are grown old in a strange country* (Bar 3:10–11).  

Second, the siege of an already debilitated people: ***he has built round about me***, that is, an army of besiegers; ***gall***, that is, an army which has brought me labor and bitterness. *Am I a sea, or a whale, that you have enclosed me in a prison?* (Job 7:12).  

Third, the captivity of those already imprisoned: ***he has set me in dark places***, to imprison; ***as those that are dead***, those who have been sentenced to death. *He has made me to dwell in darkness as those that have been dead of old* (Ps 142:3).  

These can also be understood of Jeremiah himself, who was wasted away in body and because of many difficulties, and who was locked up in prison.
