# Lecture 8

^3:22^ Heth. The mercies of the Lord that we are not consumed: because his mercies have not ceased. *(Verses 22 through 24 are missing in the Greek; one possible explanation is that the similarity between verses 21 and 24 resulted in these verses being skipped over.)*  

> ^3:23^ Heth. I know *(Heb. חֲדָשִׁים֙: *they are new*. “They are new every morning” would perhaps be a better translation of the Latin, but Thomas Aquinas appears to have understood *novi* here as meaning, “I know.”)* every morning, great is your faithfulness.

> ^3:24^ Heth. The Lord is my portion, said my soul: therefore will I wait for him.

> **52**. Here he sets forth the experience of divine mercy in the present.

And first is the recognition of this: ***the mercies of the Lord***; as it were, he is not punishing as one who is unmerciful, because he punishes less than what is deserved, not reducing us to nothing. *Correct me, O Lord, but yet with judgment: and not in fury, lest you bring me to nothing* (Jer 10:24).  

Second is the Lord’s approval of this: ***I***, I the Lord, ***know every morning***, that is, clearly. ***Great is your faithfulness***, that is, the faithfulness of Jeremiah, who in the midst of suffering recognizes his blessings. *Great is your faith: be it done to you as you will* (Matt 15:28).  

Third, he puts the intended conclusion: ***the Lord is my portion***, because unlike others who despise him, I have chosen him as my portion. *The Lord is the portion of my inheritance and of my cup* (Ps 15:5).
