# Lecture 3

^4:3^ Ghimel. Even the sea monsters have drawn out the breast, they have given suck to their young. The daughter of my people is cruel, like the ostrich in the desert.  

> **69**. Here he describes their misery in detail.

And first, he presents the affliction of the siege as regards their hunger;  

second, the capture and destruction of the city, at ***the Lord has accomplished his wrath*** (Lam 4:11);  

third, the mockery of their captors against the citizens, at ***depart you that are defiled*** (Lam 4:15).  

Concerning the first, he does four things.  

First, he touches upon the hunger of the children;  

second, the hunger of refined people, at ***they that were fed delicately have died in the streets*** (Lam 4:5);  

third, the hunger of those consecrated to God, at ***her Nazarites were whiter than snow*** (Lam 4:7);  

fourth, the immense hunger of mothers, at ***the hands of the pitiful women have boiled their own children*** (Lam 4:10).  

Concerning the first, he touches on two things.  

First, the hunger of infants;  

second, that of young children and adolescents, at ***the little ones have asked for bread*** (Lam 4:4).  

Concerning the first, he touches on two things.  

First, the lack of milk;  

second, the effect of this lack, at ***the tongue of the sucking child has stuck to the roof of his mouth*** (Lam 4:4).  

***Sea monsters*** (*lamiae*), monsters having the body of a woman and the feet of a horse, whose name comes from *laniando*, *(*Lanius*, “butcher.”)* because they tore to pieces (*laniant*) their children.  

***Cruel like the ostrich***, of which Job speaks: *She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers, she has labored in vain, no fear constraining her* (Job 39:16). And the women of Jerusalem are compared to ostriches not for cruelty of feeling but because of their similarity in acting: because they did not give milk to their children, which was from a lack of nourishment.
