# Lecture 1

^4:1^ Aleph. How has the gold become dim, the finest color is changed, the stones of the sanctuary are scattered in the top of every street?  

> **67**. Here he weeps especially over the misery of the siege.

And this is divided into two parts.  

In the first, he weeps over the misery of the people;  

in the second, he complains of the joy of those who insult them: ***rejoice, and be glad, O daughter of Edom*** (Lam 4:21).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he weeps over the affliction of the people;  

second, their helplessness to resist, at ***while we were yet standing, our eyes failed*** (Lam 4:17).  

The first point is divided in two.  

In the first, he weeps over the misery of the people in general;  

second, he describes it in detail: ***even the sea monsters have drawn out*** (Lam 4:3).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

In the first, he presents a metaphor (Lam 4:1);  

in the second, he explains it, at ***the noble sons of Zion*** (Lam 4:2).  

The Jews were eminent in three things:  

in the subtlety of their knowledge of God. *He has not done in like manner to every nation: and his judgments he has not made manifest to them* (Ps 147:20). Therefore he says, ***gold***. *There is gold, and a multitude of jewels: but the lips of knowledge are a precious vessel* (Prov 20:15). And this ***has become dim***, by the shame of infidelity. *Therefore is my people led away captive, because they had not knowledge* (Isa 5:13).  

Second, they were eminent in moral beauty. *Rich men in virtue, studying beauty: living at peace in their homes* (Sir 44:6). And therefore he says, ***the finest color***, is corrupted, as it were, into the blackness of sin and sorrow. *For his face, and the changing of his color* (2 Macc 3:16).  

Third, they were eminent in religious worship: therefore he says, ***the stones of the sanctuary are scattered in the top of every street***, among the various nations. *They took away the stones that had been defiled into an unclean place* (1 Macc 4:43).
