# Lecture 5 — The prayer of Jeremiah the prophet

***^5:1^ Remember, O Lord, what is come upon us: consider and behold our reproach.***

> ^5:2^ Our inheritance is turned to foreigners: our houses to strangers.

> ^5:3^ We are become orphans without a father: our mothers are as widows.

> ^5:4^ We have drunk our water for money: we have bought our wood.

> ^5:5^ We were dragged by the necks, we were weary and no rest was given us.

> ^5:6^ We have given our hand to Egypt, and to the Assyrians, that we might be satisfied with bread.

> ^5:7^ Our fathers have sinned, and are not: and we have borne their iniquities.

> ^5:8^ Servants have ruled over us: there was none to redeem us out of their hand.

> ^5:9^ We fetched our bread at the peril of our souls, because of the sword in the desert.

> ^5:10^ Our skin was burnt as an oven, by reason of the violence of the famine.

> ^5:11^ They humiliated the women in Zion, and the virgins in the cities of Judah.

> ^5:12^ The princes were hanged up by their hand: they did not respect the persons of the ancient.

> ^5:13^ They abused those who were young indecently: and the children fell under the wood.

> ^5:14^ The ancients have ceased from the gates: the young men from the choir of the singers.

> ^5:15^ The joy of our heart is ceased, our dancing is turned into mourning.

> ^5:16^ The crown is fallen from our head: woe to us, because we have sinned.

> ^5:17^ Therefore is our heart sorrowful, therefore are our eyes become dim.

> ^5:18^ For mount Zion, because it is destroyed, foxes have walked upon it.

> ^5:19^ But you, O Lord, shall remain forever, your throne from generation to generation.

> ^5:20^ Why will you forget us forever? Why will you forsake us for a long time?

> ^5:21^ Convert us, O Lord, to you, and we shall be converted: renew our days, as from the beginning.

> ^5:22^ But you have utterly rejected us, you are exceedingly angry against us.

> **89**. Here the prophet, after many lamentations, turns to the remedy of prayer.

And first, he expresses the misery of the people;  

second, he petitions for mercy, at ***but you, O Lord*** (Lam 5:19);  

The first is in two parts.  

First, he expresses the misery of the people as regards the evils which occurred;  

second, as regards the good things which they lost: ***the ancients have ceased from the gates*** (Lam 5:14).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he arouses attention: ***remember***, be attentive to my miseries. Above: ***remember my poverty, and transgression*** (Lam 3:19). ***Remember***, as if to say, “Hold in your notice”; ***consider***, that is, with your notice held, focus your consideration; ***behold***, by reflecting and scrutinizing.  

**90**. Second, at ***our inheritance is turned to foreigners***, he presents the affliction of the people:  

and first, in general;  

second, he descends to particular people, at ***they humiliated the women in Zion*** (Lam 5:11).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he excludes those things by which they were sustained against misfortune, namely, personal possessions, which passed into the power of their enemies: ***our inheritance is turned to foreigners***. Above: ***the enemy has put out his hand to all her desirable things*** (Lam 1:10). *And their houses shall be turned over to others, with their lands and wives together* (Jer 6:12).  

**91**. And divine protection: ***we are become orphans***, because deprived of divine—as it were, paternal—consolation. ***Our mothers***, the synagogues, ***are as widows***, whose God was called her spouse. *Neither shall he have mercy on their fatherless, and widows: for everyone is a hypocrite and wicked* (Isa 9:16).  

**92**. Second, at ***we have drunk our water for money***, he describes the particular woes they suffered:  

and first, their servitude;  

second, their affliction, at ***we fetched our bread at the peril of our souls*** (Lam 5:9).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he presents the servitude of the people;  

second, he amplifies it, at ***our fathers have sinned, and are not*** (Lam 5:7).  

Concerning the first, he does two things.  

First, he presents the servitude they endured as regards their property: ***we have drunk our water for money***, because the enemies oppress us tyrannically. *You shall draw waters for money, and shall drink* (Deut 2:6).  

Second, he presents their servitude as regards individual persons:  

**93**. and first, the force used: ***we were dragged by the necks***, as if we did not want to keep getting beaten on the neck along the way; or they were bound by the neck. *Neither shall you be quiet, even in those nations, nor shall there be any rest for the sole of your foot* (Deut 28:65).  

**94**. Second, he presents their voluntary personal servitude, because they were compelled to sell themselves into slavery to others, either absolutely or for a time; and this is: ***we have given our hand to Egypt***, as if subjecting ourselves to them. *They that were full before have hired out themselves for bread* (1 Sam 2:5). Or ***we have given our hand***, in asking for help. *And now what have you to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the troubled water?* (Jer 2:18).  

**95**. ***Our fathers have sinned***. Here he amplifies their servitude.  

And first, from the condition of those who are slaves, because they are punished for the sins of others: ***and they are not***, because they are dead. ***We have borne***, enduring their punishment.  

But on the contrary: *what is the meaning that you use among you this parable as a proverb, saying: our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the teeth of the children are set on edge* (Ezek 18:1–2).  

Solution: *I am the Lord your God, jealous, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me* (Exod 20:5). *I will repay them that hate me* (Deut 32:41).  

**96**. Second, he magnifies their servitude from the condition of their rulers: ***servants have ruled over us***, just as the Moabites, the Edomites, and other neighbors, whom they had previously ruled over. *By three things the earth is disturbed . . . by a slave when he reigns, by a fool when he is filled with meat, by an odious woman when she is married* (Prov 30:21–23).  

**97**. ***We fetched our bread***. Here he presents the affliction of their hunger:  

and first, he shows the scarcity: ***our souls***, that is, in peril of our souls, namely, of our life, fleeing into the desert from before the sword of Babylon; or that loading themselves with food they exposed themselves to dangers, so that they fled into the desert from the pursuing enemy; or because they wore out their bodies by excessive labor in searching for food. *Meeting the thirsty bring him water, meet with bread him that flees* (Isa 21:14).  

**98**. Second, he presents the effect of their hunger: ***our skin was burnt***, dried out by hunger; ***violence***, because besieged and fleeing they suffered hunger for a long time. *They are all adulterers, like an oven heated by the baker* (Hos 7:4)*. The flesh being consumed, my bone has cleaved to my skin* (Job 19:20).  

**99**. ***They humiliated the women***. Here he descends to individual persons:  

and first, the women: ***they humiliated***, by seducing them. *May you take a wife, and another sleep with her: may your daughters be given to another people, your eyes looking on* (Deut 28:30, 32).  

**100**. Second, as regards the princes: ***the princes were hanged up by their hand***, as if being tortured to make them reveal their riches. *The Lord will bring upon you a nation from afar, and from the uttermost ends of the earth, like an eagle that flies swiftly, whose tongue you cannot understand, a most insolent nation, that will show no regard to the ancients, nor have pity on the infant* (Deut 28:49–50).  

**101**. Third, as regards those who were young: ***they abused the young indecently***. *The boy they have put in the brothel, and the girl they have sold for wine, that they might drink* (Joel 3:3).  

**102**. ***The ancients have ceased from the gates***. Here he presents their misery as regards goods they lacked.  

And first, as regards the offices of persons: ***have ceased from the gates***, as if from the exercise of justice at the gates; ***from the choir***, as if no longer singing, which was the office of the nobles. *Her old men are murdered in the streets, and her young men are fallen by the sword of the enemies* (1 Macc 2:9).  

**103**. Second, as regards the exercise of rejoicing: ***the joy of our heart is ceased***. *And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation* (Amos 8:10).  

Third, as regards the glory of honorable things.  

**104**. And first, as regards the glory of the kingdom: ***the crown is fallen***. *He has stripped me of my glory and has taken the crown from my head* (Job 19:9).  

**105**. Second, as regards the glory of the temple, covering it with sorrow. ***Therefore is our heart sorrowful, therefore are our eyes become dim***, from a multitude of tears. *My sorrow is above sorrow* (Jer 8:18).  

**106**. And the cause of sorrow: ***for mount Zion***, where the temple was; ***foxes have walked upon it***, as if in deserted places. *Zion shall be ploughed as a field, and Jerusalem shall be as a heap of stones, and the mountain of the temple as the high places of the forests* (Micah 3:12).  

**107**. ***But you, O Lord***. Here he turns to begin imploring.  

And first, he confesses the majesty itself as regards the eternity of its substance: ***shall remain forever***; and as regards the duration of its royal glory: ***your throne from generation to generation***. *But you, O Lord, endure forever: and your memorial from generation to generation* (Ps 101:13).  

**108**. Second, he wonders at the indignation: ***why will you forget us forever?*** *Can a woman forget her infant, so as not to have pity on the son of her womb?* (Isa 49:15).  

**109**. Third, he proffers his petition: ***convert us, O Lord***. *Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted, for you are the Lord my God* (Jer 31:18).  

On the contrary. *Turn you to me, says the Lord of hosts, and I will turn to you* (Zech 1:3).  

And it should be said that both are true because for a meritorious work there is required both the preparation of the free will and the infusion of grace.  

***Renew our days. Who will grant me, that I might be according to the months past, according to the days in which God kept me?* (Job 29:2).  

**110**. Fourth, he presents the need for his petition: ***but you have utterly rejected us***. *Have you utterly cast away Judah, or has your soul abhorred Zion? Why then have you struck us, so that there is no healing for us?* (Jer 14:19).
