# Section 1 — Psalm 10

[Unto the end. A psalm for David] In the Lord I put my trust: how then do you say to my soul: Get thee away from hence to the mountain like a sparrow? For, lo, the wicked have bent their bow; they have prepared their arrows in the quiver; to shoot in the dark the upright of heart. For they have destroyed the things which thou hast made:

But what has the just man done? The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord's throne is in heaven.

His eyes look on the poor man: his eyelids examine the sons of men. The Lord trieth the just and the wicked:

But he that loveth iniquity hateth his own soul. He shall rain snares upon sinners: fire and brimstone and storms of winds shall be the portion of their cup. For the Lord is just, and hath loved justice: his countenance hath beheld righteousness.

a. In the preceding psalm, the giving of thanks was set forth for (the psalmist's) liberation from (his) enemies. Here, he shows the confidence brought about by having received (this liberation). And he speaks from the stance of one desiring God's kindnesses which follows upon freedom from danger.

The title (of this psalm is) *Unto the end. A psalm for David.* Jerome('s version) has *Conqueror.* This was explained above (in the commentary on Psalm 4).

This psalm can be explained literally of David, or mystically of Christ, or allegorically. Morally it concerns the just man, and heretics, as the Gloss explains.

Therefore, David first sets forth his confidence, *In the Lord I put my trust:* as liberated by God's righteous judgment, weighing sinners down and lifting up the poor: Jeremiah 17:7: *Blessed be the man that trusteth in the Lord, and the Lord shall be his confidence:* Daniel 3:40: *There is no confusion in those who trust in you.* Second, he describes the assault upon his confidence, which was effected through the spoken word (at), *How then do you say* etc.

Some people counseled David when he was fleeing so that he would go to a fortified place and indeed to the mountains; or, so that he would hide there as a sparrow would. *For* (what reason)? *Lo, the wicked have bent their bow,* etc. This can be explained in two ways. First, so that these words are not David's, but (instead are those) of others: and so, *Get thee away,* because *They (the wicked) have bent their bow.* Or, (second), these words are David's, as if he were saying, *In the Lord I put my trust:...for they have bent their bow, they have prepared their arrows* etc. And (with respect to the second of these), he does three things. First, he sets forth their perverse solicitude, second, their perverse intention, at, *To shoot,* and third, their unjust activity, at, *For they have destroyed the things which thou hast made.*

(This could can also be said) mystically of Christ. And so, "I, the Christ, *In the Lord I put my trust: how,* then, *do you,* the pharisees, *say...get thee away...to the mountain,* that is, to the observances of the law given on Mount Sinai: Deuteronomy 33:2: *The Lord came from Sinai, and from Seir he rose up to us;* and unless you do this, *Lo, the wicked have bent their bow* etc, that is, they have readied themselves to kill you and your disciples; *For they have destroyed the things which thou hast made,* that is, they have killed.

Or, (taking the passage) morally, the faithful are speaking about the heretics, according to the Gloss, *In the Lord I put my trust,* keeping his faith: *How,* then, do you heretics, *Say,* to us, *Get thee away...to the mountain,* that is, to Christ whom the heretics believed they possessed? Isaiah 2:2: *The mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared on the top of mountains:* 2 Kings 1:21: *Ye mountains of Gelboe, let neither dew, nor rain come upon you, neither be they fields of firstfruits: for there was cast away the shield of the valiant,* that is of the Jews, or of the great heretics: Jeremiah 51:25: *Behold I come against thee, thou destroying mountain...which corruptest the whole earth.*

Or, the mountain is the height of the intellect which they suppose themselves to have. But if I had accomplished this, I would be a swift sparrow, and not (a sparrow) belonging to a dwelling *(a pet?).*

*For, lo, the wicked,* that is the heretics, *Have bent their bow,* that is, have drawn (or "turned") sacred scripture towards themselves, just as those who aim a bow: *They have prepared their arrows,* eloquence full of poison, *In the quiver,* that is, in memory and knowledge: Jeremiah 5:16: *Their quiver is as an open sepulchre.* Jerome('s version) has, *His arrows upon the sinew,* that is, the string (of the bow): (with a) perverse intention, *To shoot the upright of heart,* that is the just, *In the dark,* that is, deceitfully: Jeremiah 9:8: *Their tongue is a piercing arrow.* Or, *In the dark,* that is, with the intricacies of sacred scripture.

Another version has *In the dark moon.* The moon is the Church: Canticle of Canticles 6:9: *Fair as the moon,* both on account of her brightness, and her darkness. The brightness of the moon is from the sun, just as the brightness of the Church is from Christ: John 1:9: *That was the true light, which enlighteneth every man.* Again, half of the moon's sphere is bright and the other half is dark, just as the Church is bright at times, and dark at others. The moon is darkened, according to the Gloss, at times through its revolution, and so it becomes dark: at other times, through an eclipse, and then it is becomes red or bloody; still other times, (it is darkened) through the interposition of clouds, and then it becomes black. So too does the Church become dark when, in her newness, there are no preachers and doctors for her; bloody through the persecution of tyrants; black through clouds, that is, through the seduction of heretics; and then she wishes to discharge her arrows.

Their unjust activity is set down here, (at) *For they have destroyed the things which thou hast made.* Another version has, *For (they have destroyed) he whom you have made;* but the former is better. According to Jerome('s version, we have), *For they have destroyed the laws which you have made:* Isaiah 48:8: *I know that transgressing thou wilt transgress, and I have called thee a transgressor from the womb;* Jeremiah 2:20: *Of old time thou hast broken my yoke, thou hast burst my bands, and thou saidst: I will not serve:* as if he were saying: "They destroy your law which you yourself have given to be observed." Exodus 23:7: *The innocent and just person thou shalt not condemn;* but they (the unjust and the wicked) wish to kill him (the innocent and just person): Psalm 118:53: *The wicked have destroyed thy law;* and God completed it (the law), because he gave it: Psalm 147:20: *He hath not done in like manner to every nation;* Matthew 5:17: *I am not come to destroy (the law), but to fulfil (it).*

If it were said, *They have destroyed (he) whom you have made,* then it is understood of Christ, *whom you have made.*

b. *(But what has) the just (man done?).* Here, he sets forth the reason for (his) confidence. First, he puts forth a question, second, a solution, at, *The Lord is in his holy temple,* and third, the reason for the solution, at, *For the Lord is just, and hath loved justice.*

And so, he says, "These (wicked men) have acted so; but what does the just Lord, seeing this, do in his might?" Jeremiah 33:16: *This is the name that they shall call him, The Lord our just one.* He answers (his) question, and sets down what the just one does. First, (he sets forth) his judicial power, or the rank of the judge, second, the judge's examination, at, *His eyes,* and third, the condemnation of those closely examined, at, *He that loveth iniquity.*

If a judge always punishes, he is cruel; if he always pardons, he is remiss. God, however, both pardons and punishes; for that reason, the judgment seat of mercy has a place, and this is the temple: Hebrews 4:16: *Let us go therefore with confidence to the throne of grace;* and thus he says, *The Lord is in his holy temple:* 1 Corinthians 3:16: *Know you not, that you are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?* (The judgment seat) of justice, whence he punishes, also has a place, namely heaven; and this is also (set forth at), *The Lord's throne is in heaven,* where his power is recounted: Isaiah 66:1: *Heaven is my throne.*

The faithful are called "a temple" on account of their devotion, and "heaven" because of their wisdom. Again, "heaven" is said to be the cradle in which God sits so that he makes a heaven in him (namely, the faithful), that is, (making him to) know secret things.

Again, the soul is called the temple of God, because God is adored in the temple. In like fashion (is God adored) in the soul of the faithful: Matthew 6:6: *Enter into thy chamber,* that is into the hidden recesses of your soul, *and having shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret.* Again, sacrifices are offered there (in the temple): in like fashion (are such offered) in the soul of the faithful: Psalm 50:19: *A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit.* Again, as prayers are poured forth to God in the temple, so too does God work in the soul: Isaiah 26:12: *Thou hast wrought all our works for us.* Again, because God sanctifies her, he descends into her as into his temple: Wisdom 4:15: *The grace of God, (and his mercy is with his saints,) and that he hath respect to his chosen.*

c. *His eyes.* Here he treats of the judge's examination. And first, he sets down the perfection of divine knowledge, second, the careful examination, at, *His eyelids examine the sons of men,* and third, the judge's equity, at, *The Lord trieth the just and the wicked.*

Because of the first, (namely the perfection of divine knowledge), nothing can be hidden since he sees the condition of the poor man and the wicked, of the sinner and the just: *The eyes of the Lord are brighter than the sun, watching carefully over the ways of men and the depth of the abyss, looking into the hearts of men* (unknown: possibly a variant on Job 34:21-22); Proverbs 16:2: *All the ways of a man are open to his eyes: the Lord is the weigher of spirits,* that is, of (men's) thoughts, or of (their) souls, according to the Gloss; whence he says, *His eyes look on the poor man,* to have mercy (on him): Psalm 30:10: *Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am afflicted.* And again, at Psalm 27:7: *The Lord is my helper and my protector: in him hath my heart confided* etc. (His eyes look on the poor man) also to protect (him) while examining him: Psalm 33:16: *The eyes of the Lord are upon the just.* And again, at Psalm 31:8: *I will instruct thee in this way, in which thou shalt go: I will fix my eyes upon thee.* And so, looking in this way, he examines carefully.

*His eyelids examine the sons of men.* By *eyelids* is signified discernment, for just as the eyelids direct the sight of the eye, so too does discernment regulate human wisdom: Proverbs 4:25: *Let thy eyelids go before thy steps.* Therefore, God's very discernment *examines,* that is, tests and considers: Wisdom 1:9: *Inquisition shall be made into the thoughts of the ungodly: and the hearing of his words shall come to God.* And in what manner? Sometimes he punishes, other times he spares, sometimes he gives kindnesses, and at other times he bears (these gifts) away: Job 6:4: *The arrows of the Lord (are in me, the rage whereof drinketh up my spirit, and the terrors of the Lord war against me).* He also shuts (his) eyelids and opens (them): Matthew 15:32: *I have compassion on the multitudes (because they continue with me now three days, and have not what to eat, and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way).* And again at Matthew 21:43: *The kingdom of God shall be taken from you:* Psalm 146:9: *Who giveth to beasts their food* etc.

*He examines the sons of men,* because by these very (examinations), some are made better, while others (are made) worse; or, by the scriptures, some are made better, others worse: for some understand (scriptures) well and are not tired (by the effort), but are engaged busily (by them), while the evil do the contrary.

The equity of (his) judgment is set forth: *(The Lord) trieth the just and the wicked,* because he sends afflictions upon the just and the unjust, and bestows worldly goods upon the good and the bad: Wisdom 11:11: *For thou didst admonish and try them,* namely the good, *as a father: but the others,* namely the evil, *as a severe king, thou didst examine and condemn.*

Therefore, he says, *The Lord trieth the just and the wicked,* that is, he tries (them) through tribulations. Gregory (says the following): *He trieth with punishment, if the one placed in tribulation truly loves God. He trieth the just,* that is, the Lord examines so that he may reward: Wisdom 10:17: *God rendered (to the just) the wages of their holy labor.* But He tries the wicked and the sinner so that he might be condemned: Matthew 22:13: *Bind his hands and feet, and cast him into the exterior darkness.*

d. Here the sentencing is set forth. Concerning this, he does two things. First, he sets forth blame, and second, the punishment, at, *He shall rain...upon sinners.*

He shows that as much as it is on the part of God, He is not the ruin of wicked (men), but rather (this ruin) is on our part; whence he says, *He that loveth iniquity,* that is, sin: John 3:20: *Every one that doth evil,* does iniquity, because sin is iniquity. (Such a person) hates his own soul: Wisdom 16:14: *A man through malice hates his own soul.*

But it is asked, how could anyone hate himself?

It is to be said that the sinner after a fashion hates himself; but simply (speaking), no one hates himself: Ephesians 5:29: *No man ever hateth his own flesh.*

But that the evil hate themselves in a way, and that even the good hates themselves after a fashion, is made clear in this way: Our soul has two faces (so to speak); one turned to God in accordance with reason, the other turned to flesh in accordance with the sensitive nature, which comprehends things in so far as they are bodily. And as everything delights in its proper good, so too does man delight in that which he considers to be his soul. Sinners consider their soul to be that which they principally aspire after. For everything is (identified with) that which is pre-eminent in it, just as a king is his kingdom, or his rule. Therefore, the former having a sensitive nature delight in it; however, the latter, having an intellectual nature, love it. And so, no one hates his soul insofar as it is that which he principally considers. The good, therefore, hate their souls with respect to its sensitive nature, while the evil hate its intellectual aspect.

(This could can also be said) mystically of Christ. And so, "I, the Christ, *In the Lord I put my trust: how,* then, *do you,* the pharisees, *say...get thee away...to the mountain,* that is, to the observances of the law given on Mount Sinai: Deuteronomy 33:2: *The Lord came from Sinai, and from Seir he rose up to us;* and unless you do this, *Lo, the wicked have bent their bow* etc, that is, they have readied themselves to kill you and your disciples; *For they have destroyed the things which thou hast made,* that is, they have killed.

Secondly, he sets forth the penalty. This we can explain either concerning the present or of the future. Concerning the present, it serves as a metaphor. He says that *The Lord is in heaven,* because that is where *his seat* is; but from heaven comes the rain: for that reason their penalty is signified when it is said, *He shall rain upon sinners.* And what (shall he rain upon them)? *Snares.* And if we explain this according to the present, it should be noted that in a sin there are four things. First, there is seduction; whence he says: *He shall rain snares upon sinners.* It is as if, by a just judgment, he allows them to be ensnared and seduced: Isaiah 8:15: *And very many of them shall stumble and fall, and shall be broken in pieces, and shall be snared, and taken.* Second, there is concupiscence or sensual desire; whence he says, the *fire* of concupiscence: Psalm 57:9: *Fire,* namely of carnal concupiscence, *hath fallen on them, and they shall not see the sun.* Third, there is the stench of dishonor; whence he says, *Brimstone,* just as the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and brimstone. A fourth can be added, namely the uneasiness of the mind; when he says, *Storms of winds:* Isaiah 57:20: *The heart of the wicked is like a raging sea (which cannot rest). The portion of their cup:* because a cup is a sort of measure, and each of themequitatem ostendit.
