# Section 1 — Psalm 12

**How long, O Lord, wilt thou forget me unto the end? how long dost thou turn away thy face from me?**

**How long shall I take counsels in my soul, sorrow in my heart all the day?**

**How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?**

**Consider, and hear me, O Lord my God. Enlighten my eyes that I never sleep in death: lest at any time my enemy say: I have prevailed against him. They that trouble me will rejoice when I am moved:**

**but I have trusted in they mercy. My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation: I will sing to the Lord, who giveth me good things: yea I will sing to the name of the Lord the most high.**

In the preceding Psalm, the Psalmist considered the deceitful ways of his adversaries; here he beseeches God for assistance against them. The title, **Unto the End, A Psalm for David**, was explained above (*Translator's Note:* Cf. *Psalmus IV* (Parma vol. 14, pp. 157-158). "And so he truly says **unto the** **end** (*in finem*) if this is considered with respect to the reality (*res*) symbolized by the Psalm, that is unto Christ (*in Christum*); Rom 10:4, **Christ is the end of the Law with respect to righteousness for every one who believes**. But if **unto the end** is considered according to the figure then it is meant to be understood as being sung on behalf of the fulfillment of a work or an undertaking, just as this Psalm was composed because David had achieved freedom from the persecution of Absalom, thus for victory as it were"). This Psalm is divided into three parts. In the first part his lament is set forth; in the second his supplication, therein, **Consider and hear me**; and in the third the favorable answer, therein, **I [have trusted] in thy mercy**. The lament contains three elements: he is astonished at this divine disregard, he confesses his own weakness, and bewails the power of his adversary. Second, therein, **How long?** Third, therein, **How long shall [my enemy] be exalted?**

Now someone who turns a blind eye to another's injuries does so either because he does not remember him, or because he does not wish to provide assistance. And thus he says, **Lord**, I am oppressed by adversaries and yet you will provide no assistance? **How long wilt thou forget me unto the end?** That is to say, it seems that you wish to hurt me; Isa 49:14, *Zion said, 'The Lord hath forsaken me, and the Lord hath forgotten me*; Hab 1:13, *Why lookest thou upon them that do unjust things, and holdest thy peace when the wicked devoureth the man that is more just than himself?* **How long dost thou turn away thy face from me?** He turns away his face whenever he provides no assistance; Ps 43:25, *Why turnest thou thy face away? And forgetest our want and our trouble?* This is in keeping with the history of David who was persecuted by Saul for so long. Allegorically, it is said of the Old Testament patriarchs who were steadfastly waiting for Christ. And indeed God, as if he had forgotten them, did delay in bringing them assistance. Thus they say to him, **How long Lord etc., How long dost thou turn away thy face from me?** That is to say, the presentation of your Son to us. Or it could even be the lament of the righteous people in modern times concerned with the delay of the Second Coming, **How Long Lord wilt thou forget me?** Will this be **unto the end**, that is, on the Judgment Day, or until death? And so, **How long dost thou turn away thy face from me?** That is to say, the face of your glory, so that I might see you face to face; Ex 33:13, *Shew me thy face*; Ps 79:4, *Shew us thy face and we shall be saved*.

There are still many reasons which can be given as to why the ancient fathers longed so much for the coming of Christ in the flesh. First of all, so that human nature would then be exalted, in whose person it is said in Lam 1:11, *See, O Lord for I am become vile.* Yet it was exalted by the Incarnation; Ps 72:24, *With thy glory thou hast received me*. That is to say, I am become glorious, just as a lowborn woman is elevated if she marries a noble husband. Henceforth, following the advent of the Savior, every sin is more grievous than it had been before. Just as it would be all the more ignominious for a noble man or woman to engage in shameful behavior than it would be for a peasant. The second reason is in order that the captives be liberated from the prison of hell or limbo; Job 17:16, *All that I have shall go down into the deepest pit; thinkest thou that there at least I shall have rest?* It is as if he were to say 'no; but through Christ we have been set free from this place.' Zech 9:11, *Thou also, by the blood of thy testament, hast sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water*. The third is due to the affliction of the devil; Ps 88:11, *Thou hast humbled the proud one, as one that is slain*. That is to say, you have diminished his power. The fourth, because it is through the coming of Christ that God has made peace with us; Ephes 2:14: *The corner stone who hath made both one*. The fifth, on account of the delight which they were hoping to find with Christ, seeing, hearing, and keeping company with him; Matt 13:16, *Blessed are your eyes because which see what you have seen etc.*

Of course, people of modern times also long for the Second Coming. First, because we will be exalted at that time; Wis 3:8, *The holy ones shall judge the nations and rule over the people*. And likewise in Wis 5:5, *They are numbered among the children of God*. Second, because we will be liberated from all punishment; Isa 25:8, *The Lord shall wipe away tears from every face*. That is to say, the reason for weeping or punishment. Third, because we will be liberated from every sin; Isa 25:8, *The reproach of his people the Lord shall take away from off the whole earth*. Fourth, because we will then be delivered from the power of the devil; Isa 11:9, *They shall not hurt, nor shall they kill in all my holy mountain*. Fifth, because we will be set free from the servitude of the body; Ps 141:8, *Bring forth my soul out of prison*; and Rom 8:21, *The creature also itself shall be delivered from the servitude of corruption*. Sixth, because we will see God face to face; 1 Jn 3:2, *We know that when he shall appear we shall be like to him, because we shall see him as he is*; and Jer 31:34, *For all shall know me from the least of them even to the greatest.* A lament may be offered by any righteous man who is afflicted either by adversity, or by the corruption of sin and concupiscence.

Here he confesses his own weakness. And in connection with this matter he does two things. First, he expresses the anguish of his heart. Second, the sorrow which follows, therein, **The sorrow in my heart all the day**. With regard to the first aspect, the Philosopher says in his *Rhetoric*, 'Fear produces consultations.' The same is found in Isa 16:3, *Take counsel, gather a council*. Thus a man faced with adversity and trial sometimes takes counsel as to how he might withstand it. Therefore, he says, **How long shall I take counsels in my soul?** That is to say, how long must I take new counsels in order to withstand my enemies? So the Old Testament, patriarchs had taken different counsels for the purpose of symbolizing Christ. When a man accepts one path in counsel and it still fails him, however, then sorrow follows. And it is for this reason that he says, **How long shall I take**, Lord, **counsels in my soul?** That is to say, daily, while I continually faint away; Jer 8:18, *My sorrow is above sorrow, my heart mourneth within me*.

Here he bewails the prosperity of his enemy who is going to be exalted, namely Saul over David, as well as the enemy who leads one into the consensus of sin and the flesh, for they too have their own desires; Hab 1:4, *Therefore judgment commeth not to the end, because the wicked prevaileth against the just*.

In the second part of this Psalm he sets forth a prayer or petition. First of all, he stipulates his petition in response to this divine disregard. The second concerns his own weakness, therein, **Enlighten my eyes etc**. The third concerns the prosperity of his enemies, therein, **Lest at any time [my enemy] say etc**. He speaks first of the divine disregard, the forgetfulness and the turning away. It is as if he were to say, **Consider!** That is, turn around, for you have turned away and have thereupon forgotten me. Now **hear me!** Isa 64:9, *See, we are all thy people*. Second, he sets forth the petition which pertains to his own weakness: one from many counsels, and another from sorrows. Therefore, because I find no counsels within myself, **Enlighten my eyes that I never sleep in death**. That is to say, instruct me! Likewise, in Lk 1:79, *To enlighten them that sit in darkness etc.* This literally corresponds to David fleeing from the presence of Saul, of whom he often had to beware, lest at some time he might fall into his hands and be killed. Similarly, as long as a man is conscientious in resisting sin he does not fall into death, but when he sleeps he is killed. Thus in 2 Kings (2 Sam 4:5), *When Isboseth hath fallen asleep, and the handmaid was cleansing the wheat, he was killed*; and Eph 5:14, *Rise thou that sleepest*. There is also the petition against his adversary, **Lest my enemy say**. And so he establishes two things: first his petition, and second his rationale, therein, the one **who troubles me. Enlighten my eyes, lest my enemy say, rejoicing, 'I have prevailed against him.'** For the devil rejoices whenever he tempts and drags someone into sin. Similarly, *Rise, O Lord, let not man prevail* (Ps 9:20). He would rejoice for this very sort of reason, because they **will rejoice when I am moved**, if I were to renounce the position of righteousness and stumble into sin **;** Sir 18:30-31, *Go not after thy lusts, but turn away from thy own will. If thou give to thy soul her desires she will make thee a joy to thy enemies*; and Dan 9:18, *Incline, O my God, thy ear and hear; open thy eyes and see our desolation and the city upon which thy name is called*.

In this place the favorable answer to his prayer is signified; and in connection with this he does three things. First, he maintains his hope of a favorable answer. Second, there is his joy over the favorable answer rendered, therein, **My heart rejoiced**. Third, he gives thanks, therein, **I will sing**. This is why he says, **I have trusted in thy mercy**, not in the world; Lam 3:22, *The mercies of the Lord are many that we are not consumed*. It is not in my power, since that is nothing against the devil; Job 41:24, *There is no power upon earth that can be compared with him*. Thus he stipulates three things here which will help man in combating the devil, namely spiritual happiness, devout prayer, and good works. As such, he says first, **My heart rejoiced in thy salvation**, not in worldly trappings and vanities as sinners do, concerning which Job 21:12-13 says, *They rejoice at the sound of the organ. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to hell*; and Hosea 9:1, *Rejoice not, O Israel: rejoice not as the nations do*, but **in thy salvation**, that is, in Christ who came in order to save us; Matt 1:21, *For he shall save etc.* And so this joy arms man against the devil; Prov 17:22, *A joyful mind maketh age flourishing: a sorrowful spirit drieth up the bones*. Second, there is prayer or praise of God. Whereupon, he adds, **I will sing to the Lord**. That is to say, I will praise him; Ps 21:24, *Ye that fear the Lord, praise him*. Praising God is very effective in the fight against the devil; Matt 17:20, *This kind of demon is not cast out but by prayer and fasting*; and Hab 3:18, *But I will rejoice in the Lord: and I will joy in my God Jesus*. This is for the favors he has bestowed. Thus it follows, for he **giveth me good things**. That is to say, he is the one who bestows good things; Jas 1:17, *Every perfect gift etc.* And he says, **good things** because there are some temporal goods which the Lord does bestow; Matt 25:14-15, *He delivered to them his goods. And to one he gave five talents etc.* Likewise, he bestows spiritual goods, which are the goods of grace as well as the virtues; 1 Cor 12:4-11, *Now there are diversities of graces etc. All these things are the work of one and the same Spirit, who allots to everyone according as he will*; and Job 2:10, *If we have received good things at the hand of the Lord etc.* This also applies to the goods of glory; Ps 26:13, *I believe to see the good things of the Lord in the land of the living*. The Lord bestows all these good things and therefore is rightly praised; Sir 51:23, *To him that giveth me wisdom will I give glory*. The third is good work, concerning which he adds, **I will chant the Psalm**. That is to say, I will be active. For chanting the Psalm means undertaking the Psalter in one's deeds. Jerome says, "Always be engaged in doing something good, so that the devil finds you occupied." Matt 12:43, *When an unclean Spirit is gone out of a man etc. until he enters in and they dwell there etc. and they become etc.* **The name of the Lord**. That is to say, with respect to praising the name of the Lord **most high**; Lk 2:14, *Glory to God in the highest*; and Matt 5:16, *So let your light shine before men, that they may see etc.*
