# Section 1 — Psalm 14

**Lord, who shall dwell in your tabernacle? or rest on your holy mountain?**

**He who enters without blemish, and does justice. He who speaks the truth in his heart, and has not brought about deceit in his speech.**

**He who has done no evil to his fellow man, and accepts no reproach against his neighbours.**

**In his sight, the wicked are brought to nothing; but he glorifes those that fear the Lord.**

**He who swears an oath to his neighbour, and does not break it; he who has not given his money to usury, nor taken bribes against the innocent. He who does these things, shall not be moved forever.**

Previously, the psalmist treated of the malice and deceit of his enemies. Here, he treats of proper justice. First, he shows what kind of justice God accepts, and then, as one giving thanks, he shows the quality of His justice, at, *Preserve me* (Psalm 15).

In this psalm (the title of which is *A Psalm of David*), he does two things. Inasmuch as he consults with God, like a priest standing in God's presence, he first poses a question, and then offers an explanation, at, *He who enters without blemish.*

So, he puts forth two questions because of the two-fold status of the Church, that is, in the here and now, and in the future. The first refers to the Church as it struggles on this earth, the Church Militant - *Apocalypse 14: From henceforth now, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours* - and both are indicated in the Old Testament. For at first they had the tabernacle - *??: For a long time they had wars and labours; 2 Kings 7: It came to pass that when the Lord had given David rest from all of his enemies, he said to Nathan: Do you see that I dwell in a house of cedar and that the ark of God is lodged within skins?* Afterwards, he made the temple, when there was peace.

By the tabernacle is designated the Church as it struggles on this earth, and by the temple on the mount, the state of its future life. Thus he says, *Who shall dwell in your tabernacle,* that is, in the Church of the present, as if he were saying, Who is worthy to dwell: for sinners dwell among the multitude, and not among the deserving. Jerome's version has, *Who will be absent from - Psalm 67: (God) who makes men of one manner to dwell in a house.*

The second question is *Who shall rest on your holy mountain?* The mountain is called holy because there is nothing defiled there - *Jeremias 31: The Lord bless you, the beauty of justice, the holy mountain; Isaiah 35: It shall be called the holy way; Exodus 15: You shall bring them in, and plant them on the mountain of your inheritance, in your most firm habitation which you have made, O Lord.*

*He who.* At this point, he gives his response in a two-fold manner. First, he mentions the merits of those living in the previously mentioned places, namely in the tabernacle and on God's holy mountain, and secondly, their reward, at, *He who does these things, shall not be moved forever.*

While he describes ten effects of virtue, the action of the virtuous is considered in a two fold way, first, through a comparison with their own action, and secondly, with that of others.

He first describes those things through which a man operates well as such, and then those things through which he is well-related to his neighbour, at, *He who has done no evil to his fellow man* etc. With respect to the former, his activity and speech are described in relation to exterior things. His activity is described in two ways. First, that he avoid evil. Thus, he says, *He who enters without blemish.* His very life is a sort of road to eternal life. Thus, he says, *He who enters,* that is, he who walks in the way - *Psalm 41: I will go into the place of the tabernacle; Psalm 118: Blessed are the undefiled in the way. Without blemish,* namely mortal sin, since venial sin does not blemish properly speaking - *Ecclesiasticus 31: Blessed is the rich man that is found without blemish.* But no blemish at all arose in Christ and the Virgin Mary; temperance is attributed to both, since a person in opposition to temperance is blemished. Second, that he do good works. Hence he continues, *And does justice,* that is, those things to which justice inclines. And he is brought to justice as it is a special virtue.

His speech is described next, first, that he do good, *He who speaks the truth,* namely, that he do good through his speech - *Isaiah 33: Which of you shall dwell with everlasting burnings?* He who walks in just ways, and speaks the truth, *In his heart,* against those who speak the truth by chance, and not by their own effort - *Proverbs 12: The lip of truth shall be steadfast; 1 Peter 2: Laying aside every lie and deceit, as newborn babes.* Secondly, that (in his speech) he avoid evil, namely deceitfulness - *Jeremiah 9: Their tongue is a piercing arrow, deceitful is their speech.*

*And has not brought about deceit in his speech.* Another version has, *And is not free in his speech - Proverbs 25: As a city that lies open and is not encircled with walls, so is a man that cannot restrain his own spirit in speaking.* Another version has, *And there is no accusation in his speech,* either because he is not a detractor and a gossip, or his words are not reprehensible - *Ephesians 4: Let no evil speech proceed from your mouth.*

*He who has done no evil.* Previously, the psalmist treated of virtuous activity which God accepts. He did this by enumerating those activities by which a man operates well with respect to himself. Here, however, he enumerates those activities through which he is well-related to his neighbour.

He describes three things with respect to his neighbour. First, that he do him no harm, second, that he not consent to harm - *Romans 1: Those who do such things, do not obtain the kingdom of god; they are worthy of death, not only those that do these acts, but they also that consent to those that do them* - and third, that he not ensnare him.

Therefore, he says with respect to the first, *He who does no evil to his fellow man,* neither corporally or spiritually: *Romans 12: To no man rendering evil for evil; Galatians 6: While we have time, let us work good.*

With respect to the second, he says, *And has accepted no reproach against his neighbours.* People say things against another, but such are not to be endured. For this reason he says, *And has accepted no reproach,* that is, at that time, when he hears disparaging words against another, on account of these words he destests that man, concerning which they are said, or he even speaks to them (these words) - *Eccl. 19: You have heard a word against your neighbour; let it die in you* etc.; *??? (psalm 57:5-6, proverbs 17:4): Close your ear to intricacies, and do not listen to vile speach.*

Jerome says, *If one is not a listener, one is not a detractor.* Bernardus states, *I cannot easily say which is more deserving of condemnation, to disparage, or to listen to one disparaging. Proverbs 25: The north wind disperses the rain, and a sad face the speech of one disparaging,* since disparaging litterally ceases when the one listening is saddened.

*To nothing.* At this point, he shows what he will not despise. There are two things which pertain to man, namely sin and virtue. Sin is to be despised; and thus he says *The wicked,* insofar as that sort, *are brought to nothing,* that is, are considered as nothing. And this is good, first to eliminate the imitation (of their ways); for an evil is sometimes honoured - *Jeremias 12: The way of the wicked prospers* etc.

However, according to this, one ought never to consider him great, but ought to despise him - *Malachi 2: The glory of man's sin is dung and worm: today it is exalted and tomorrow it is not found,* *because he has lived on the land, and his thought has perished.*

Or a great person intends to do harm, but because he is wicked, you despise him: for that sort of disparagement is an approving of our life - *Psalm 26: If an army,* that is, sinners, *persists against me, my heart will not fear.*

But the virtuous man is consider to be great; thus he says, *But he glorifies those that fear the Lord - Eccl. 25: How great is he who finds wisdom and knowledge, but there is none above him who fears the Lord.*

The gloss explains this differently: *In his sight, the wicked are brought to nothing,* that is, the devil is conquered by him - *John 2: You have conquered the wicked* etc. The Lord glorifies those who fear the Lord, namely himself. However, the first explanation is the more literal one.

Here, he holds back so that he does not deceive his neighbour. One's neighbour is deceived in three ways. First, in promisses, and this, through an oath; thus he says, *He who swears an oath* etc., that is, assents so as to deceive, because he does not comply - *Zachariah 8: You do not love the deceitful oath; Leviticus 14: You will not swear falsely in the name of the your God, nor will you defile it.* Swearing does not pertain to virtue, but rather to the keeping of an oath.

Secondly, in agreements. So, *He who has not given his money to ursury - Luke 6: Give a loan, hoping nothing in return: and do not accepts bribes against the innocent; Proverbs 17: The wicked accept gifts from the bosom,* that is, from the Church, *to corrupt the path of the judge;* *Deuteronomy 23* forbids that it be given to a brother in usury, because he sells what does not exist, although he does not have usufruct (the right of enjoying the use and advantages of another's property short of the destruction or waste of its substance).

Thirdly, in judgments, when he gives a statement against the innocent; and thus he says, *And bribes - Isaiah 5: Woe to those who justify wicked deeds on account of bribes; Job 19: Fire will devour the dwellings of those who readily accept bribes.*

Consequently, he sets down a reward (for the one) *who does* *these things,* that is who observes all of the aforesaid - *Jacob 1: Be doers of the word; Romans 2: The hearers of the law are not justifed before God, but rather the doers.*

*Shall not be moved forever,* that is, this person will dwell on my holy mountain - *Psalm 124: He who trusts in the Lord is like Mount Syon* etc.; *Psalm 54: You will not deliver the just into eternal unrest.*
