# Section 1 — Psalm 16

**The prayer of David. Hear, O Lord, my justice: attend to my supplication. Give ear unto my prayer, (which proceedeth) not from deceitful lips. Let my judgment come forth from thy countenance: let thy eyes behold the things that are equitable. Thou hast proved my heart, and visited it by night, thou hast tried me by fire: and iniquity hath not been found in me. That my mouth may not speak the words of men: for the sake of the words of thy lips, I have kept hard ways. Perfect thou my goings in thy paths: that my footsteps be not moved.**

**I have cried (to thee), for thou, O God, hast heard me: O incline thy ear unto me, and hear my words.**

**Shew forth thy wonderful mercies; thou who savest them that trust in thee. From them that resist thy right hand keep me, as the pupil of the eye. Protect me under the shadow of thy wings. From the face of the wicked who have afflicted me.**

**My enemies have surrounded my soul: they have shut up their fat: their mouth hath spoken proudly. They have cast me forth and now they have surrounded me: they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth. They have taken me, as a young lion dwelling in secret places.**

**Arise, O Lord, disappoint him and supplant him; deliver my soul from the wicked one: thy sword from the enemies of thy hand. O Lord, divide them from the few of the earth in their life: their belly is filled from thy hidden (stores). They are full of children: and they have left to their little ones the rest (of their substance).**

**But as for me, I will appear before thy sight in justice: I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear.**

Previously, the Psalmist described divine justice and showed that he observed it. In this psalm, he offers a prayer in which he asks to be heard for the sake of justice.

Its title is "The Prayer of David", and it is the first psalm entitled with (the word) "prayer" (for the whole of it is a prayer). This psalm arises from prayer because in the midst of tribulations, prayer is an unparalled refuge; Psalm 108: "Instead of making me a return of love, they detracted me: but I gave myself to prayer."

This psalm, then, is divided into two parts. In the first, he prays for his own endurance. In the second, he asks for deliverance from evil, at *I have cried.* Concerning the former, he does two things. First, he asks to be heard, and second, sets forth his petition, at *From they countenance.*

Now, in hearkening (to another), a three-fold approach must be considered. Frist, he to whom the petition is made hears the words, second, he considers (its) meaning, and third, he fulfills what is prayed for.

Accordingly, he asks first that he be heard, saying *Hear* etc; Daniel 9: "Hear O Lord God the prayer of thy servant". In his hearkening, he next states the merit of the petitioner. Thus, he says *My justice.* It is as if he were saying, "There is merit in me so that you may hearken (to me)". The Gloss states "Justice has a voice before God, by which (voice) it penetrates the heavens"; James 5: "The continual prayer of a just man availeth much"; John 9: "God doth not hear sinners: but if a man be a server of God (and doth His will), him He heareth".

(With respect to the) second (step), he asks that he strive after the meaning of his prayer, *Attend to my supplication.* The Gloss says "Supplication, which is for removing evils." Another version has "Attend to my songs", to (my) spiritual understanding, as it were; Psalm 129: "Let thy ears be attentive to the voice of my supplication".

(And as for the) third (step, he asks) that He listen to the words of (his) praying. And so, he says *Give ear unto my prayer* which is *not from deceitful lips* but from sincere ones; Isaiah 53: "There was no deceit in his mouth".

But since He hears all things, why does He hear one prayer, but not another? Wisdom 1: "The Holy Spirit of discipline will flee from the deceitful, and will withdraw himself from thoughts that are without understanding."

(In response to this I say that) God is not said to listen except to true words, and not to those which come from deceitful lips; and so he says *not with decietful lips.* Psalm 11: "(with) deceitful lips (and) with a (double) heart (they have spoken)". "Deceitful" is thus taken in a two-fold way, namely, as insincerity with respect to mouth and deed when the latter does not agree with the former. The Pharisee who said "I am not as the rest of men" (Luke 18), was not heard, but the other man (the publican) who prayed *not with deceitful lips,* but uprightly, was heard because "he went down into his house justified" (Luke 18). The Gloss has "Deceitful lips are those which say 'Lord, Lord', and do not do the will of my Father".

*From they countenance.* A judge does not deliver (his) sentence unless he has heard the petition and has considered the affair. For this reason, he makes his petition at this point. He asks for three things. First, a sentence, second, an examination of the affair, at, *You have proved,* and third, a condition of sentence, at, *Perfect.* Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he asks for judgment, and second moderation (or "that it be moderate), at, *Let thy eyes.*

Thus he says *From the countenance,* that is from thy thought, *Let my judgment come forth,* that is, for my benefit; Jeremiah 10: "Correct me, O Lord, but yet with judgment, and not in thy fury, lest thou bring me to nothing". But here, he asks for a judgment not of severity (Isaiah 64: "All our justices as the rag of a menstruous woman"), but of equity, in so far as human nature permits. Consequently, he says, *Let thy eyes behold the things that are equitable,* that is, let (them) decide an equitable judgment; Isaiah 11: "He shall reprove with equity for the meek of the earth"; Job 23: "Let him propose equity against me, and let my judgment come to victory." It is as if he were saying "I do not ask for judgment, because my cause has been examined by you." He shows that his cause has been examined in his presence when he says *Thou has proved* etc. First, he shows the order of examintion, and second, what was discovered, (which latter) he explains at, *And iniquity has not been found in me.*

Consequently, he says, *Thou hast proved my heart.* There is a difference between proving and examining. Proving (in the sense of testing, inspecting, trying) enquires after the reason for what has been done, while examining enquires after the deed itself. The former pertains more to the heart, but the latter more to the body. Thus, he says, *Thou hast proved my heart,* that is having proved (my heart), you have seen that it has not been disturbed according to the tribulations which I have suffered.

When God examines, He does three things, namely, he proves, visits, and examines. He proves when he discerns whether an individual has rectitude of heart. For if he does not (have this rectitude), then he does not trouble himself to examine (him). But when (an individual) has this (rectitude), he will need to be examined (to see) whether he has constancy; Jeremiah 17: "I am the Lord who search the heart and prove the reins: who give to every one according to his way". But this examination is severe and powerful, so much so that no one would withstand it unless helped by Him; Job 6: "For what is my strength that I can hold out? or what is my end that I should keep patience? My strength is not the strength of stones, nor is my flesh of brass (Neither my strength or my flesh is of brass)". And so, he goes forward in visitation; Psalm 88: "I will visit with a rod", either helping or correcting.

*Thou hast visited (my heart) by night.* (This visitation) can be understood by "night" and "fire" because (either) disturbs the soul; Job 30: "In the night my bone is pierced with sorrows...and fire does the same".

*By night* (can also be understood as) "in the absence of spiritual understanding". At times, one has an upright heart when temptation and negligence falls upon one and one's heart is in the night. The Lord visits in one's heart by helping (one) against temptations, driving away negligence, and comforting (one); Psalm 49: "When my power fails, do not abandon me".

*By night* (can also be understood as) "in quiet and silence", and (in this situation) he visits through consolations; Matthew 25: "And at midnight there was a cry made: Behold the bridegroom cometh".

*Thou hast tried me by fire,* that is, by tribulation, because it is then apparent if he is a good friend and does not withdraw; Ecclesiasticus 6: "There is a friend for his own occasion, and he will...abide in the day of thy trouble". Innocence and perfection are discovered by this very examination since it examines if innocence is to be found in him, and indeed it is found in him. He first sets out his innocence, and second, his perfection, at, *And iniquity hath not been found in me.*

But on the contrary there is 1 John 1: "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us", and Proverbs 20: "Who can say: My heart is clean (I am pure from sin?", and Ecclesiastes 7: "(For) there is no just man upon earth that doth good and sinneth not". The Gloss adds "Nor an infant of one day".

(I respond) by saying that he speaks concerning the iniquity of sin through which one withdraws from God in tribulation. The perfection of innocence is found in him in so far as he does not speak *The works of men,* that is, sin. It is as if he were saying "Iniquity is not only not in his heart, but also not in his mouth"; Job 6: "You shall not find iniquity on my tongue, neither shall folly sound in my mouth"; Ephesians 4: "Let no evil speech proceed from your mouth".

Or (it could be interpreted) in this way: *...and iniquity hath not been found in me. That my mouth may not speak,* when after follows *The works of men,* as if to say "You yourself have seen that there is no iniquity in me; and this is so because it is not proper for me to speak (of such); but you yourself have seen this"; Proverbs 27: "Let another praise thee, and not thy own mouth: a stranger, and not thy own lips".

Jerome has "You have proved and you have not found my thoughts to ascend beyond my mouth", as if to say, "Confusion does not proceed so far that it comes from the heart to the mouth by murmurings".

Next, he sets forth by what fire the examination was made, when he says, *For the sake of the words of thy lips, I have kept hard ways.* The hard ways are adversities, and I have sustained this *for the sake of the words of thy lips,* so that I might serve, or announce, your words; Jeremiah 22: "The word of the Lord was done in opprobrium and in derision".

Jerome has "(...I have kept) as hidden ways". Thieves seek out-of-the-way places that they may hide, as David did when Saul was pursuing him; Psalm 17: "Who hath made my feet like the feet of harts". Spiritually, it is said of Christ punished among theives as an evildoer; John 18: "If he were not an evildoer, we would not have delivered him up to thee".

If you begin the verse at *For the sake of...the works of men...I have kept hard ways,* you assert hard ways which are the works of men; Proverbs 4: "I will shew thee the way of wisdom, I will lead thee by the paths of equity, which when thou shalt have entered" etc.

Next, he determines what he seeks, *Perfect thou my goings in thy paths,* namely of justice; Job 4: "Where is...thy fortitude, thy patience, and the perfection of thy ways?" And this, so that the *Feet,* which is to say, my desire, *may not be moved* from your commands.

Or (one could say that) he seeks Christ on behalf of the Church so that his ways may be perfected, and that his *Feet (or footsteps),* which is to say, the sacraments, *may not be moved.*

Again, since habits are generated from actions, (one could say that) actual vestiges (or *footsteps* so to speak) are left in the will.

Or literally, he seeks David, that he may not be hurled down from the craggy rocks through which he passed, fleeing Saul; 1 Kings 24: "Saul...went out to seek after (David)...upon the most craggy rocks".

Another version has "Sustain my steps in my ways, and let not my footsteps fail".

Or, (it could be said) that Christ, as man, is perfected in the eternal glory of divinity; John 17: "Glorify thou me, O Father, with thyself, with the glory which I had before the world was".

*I have cried.* Previously, the Psalmist set forth that he be made steadfast in goodness. But here, he asks that he be liberated from evil. Concerning this he does three things. First, he asks to be heard in his petition. Second, he sets it (his petition) forth, at, *Shew forth thy wonderful mercies.* Third, he shows the granting of his petition, at, *But as for me.* Concerning the first he does two things. First, he demonstrates his hope received from God. Second, from this received hope he asks that he be heard, at, *O incline thy ear.*

And so, he says *I have cried.* It would seem that the order is inverted. It would be more suitable to have said, "Because I have cried, you have heard me." This is explained thus in a three-fold way. First, according to the Gloss, *I have cried.* In a cry, the intent of the mind is more powerful, and (is) unrestrained. Therefore, at that moment, they cry who pray with great devotion and freedom of heart. And on account of what? *For thou has heard,* namely by giving freedom.

Gregory states "God hears no one except he whom He inspires to entreat." And he inspires the soul namely through some devotion; Psalm 118: "He desired my soul to desire" etc.

The second way is according to Augustine's *City of God,* Book 10. (There, he says) that the (word) "since" does not designate a cause, but a sign, as if to say, "This is a sign that I have cried, for you have heard me."

The third way (of explaining this is) that when someone is heard, he asks time and again more confidently. And so, he says "Since you have heard, I have cried."

Jerome has, "(I have cried) since you have heard (me) completely." He always joins these two (words), cry and hearkening, because he who cries thus is heard; Jonah 2: "I cried out of my affliction to the Lord, and He heard me"; Psalm 141: "I cried to thee (O Lord): I said, Thou art (my hope)" etc.

Following this, he asks to be heard. And he who hearkens first hears. Thus he says *O incline.* Unless the Lord were in a high place, it would be appropriate that he incline his ear so as to hear he who is in the least (place). The Lord sits in his majesty, and if he wanted us to treat our affairs according to the height of his justice, we would not be saved, because (according to) Isaiah 64: "(We are all become as one unclean, and) all our justice as the rag of a menstruous woman." Thus, it is appropriate that he incline and then hear: Daniel 9: "Incline, O my God, thy ear, and hear."

*Shew forth thy wonderful mercies.* Here, he makes his petition which is two-fold. First, concerning his liberation, and second, concerning the defeat of his enemies, at, *Arise, O Lord, disappoint him.* Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he asks for liberation, and second, adds the necessity of liberation, at, *My enemies.* Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he asks for mercy, second for safety, at *Thou who savest them,* and third, the mode of liberation, at, *Keep me, as the pupil of thy eye.*

Thus, he says, *Make wonderful.* It is not wonderful when one is liberated from an insignificant enemy. But when one is liberated from a great evil, or enemy, this is wonderful. And this he asks, *Make wonderful,* that is wonderously liberate me, not according to the judgment of man, but according to *Thy mercy;* Ecclesiasticus 36: "Renew thy signs, and work new wonders. Glorify thy hand, and the right hand. Raise up indignation, and pour out wrath. Take away the adversary, and crush the enemy." And the reason for this is that it is yours and appropriate (to do this).

*Thou who savest them that trust in thee;* Ecclesiasticus 2: "No one hath hoped in the Lord, and hath been confounded." And saved *From them that resist thy right hand.* The right hand of God is (his) power working spiritually in the good; Proverbs 3: "Length of days is in her right hand and her left hand riches and glory." Demons and sinners who impede spiritual matters are said to resist the right hand of God. The right hand of God is also said of Christ; Psalm 117: "The right hand of God wrought strength", whom the Jews resist by contradicting his teachings (John 7: "How doth this man know letters having never learned?"), and by disparaging his activities; John 9: "This man is not of God who keepeth not the Sabath"; Luke 11: "He casteth out devils by Baelzebub, the prince of devils."

But is the question "You are terrible, and who will resist you?" contrary to (this) Psalm? No one therefore can contradict His will; Job 9: "God, whose wrath no man can resist."

(In response) it must be said that no one effectively is able to resist Him, but can have the will or intention of resisting (Him).

Next, he sets down the mode of liberation, that (He do this) diligently and safely. And so, he says, *Keep me as the pupil of the eye.* The pupil of the eye is kept with diligence because nothing which can wound (it) is permitted to draw near. And in this way, God takes his servant into (His) protection; Deuteronomy 32: "He led him about, and taught him: and he kept him as the pupil of his eye"; Zacharias 2: "For he that toucheth you, toucheth the pupil of my eye."

Or, according to the Gloss, "The pupil of the eye is said of Christ directing"; Eccl. 3: "The power of sight is in the pupil of the eye whereby we discern good from evil", and Christ discerns the faithful from the unfaithful, and the bad from the good. To show clearly this diligent protection, a two fold metaphor is employed, namely of shadow, and of wings. Now shade refreshes (one) from heat, just as God's care refreshes (one) with safety. Again, a hen protects her chicks in her wings against a bird of prey, just as God defends the just from the rapacity of the demons in His Wings, which are charity and mercy; Matthew 23: "How often would I have gathered together thy children, as the hen doth gather her chickens under her wings, and thou wouldest not?" Therefore, in (his) wings, God raises up to the heavens; Psalm 88: "Mercy and truth shall go before thy face: blessed is the people (that knoweth jubiliation); Jeremiah 31: "I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore have I drawn thee, taking pity on thee."

*The pupil of the eye* (could also be) said of the soul, for as the puil, which is in the middle of the eye, is encompassed by much skin for its protection (and as a person hold out his hand and almost everything that he has so that it may not be injured), so too should a person do (this) for his soul; Job 2: "Skin for skin (and all that a man hath he will give for his life") for, as it is said at Mark 16: "What does it profit a man to gain the whole world but lose his soul?"

Or, *Keep me as the pupil of the eye,* that is, as Christ, *Protect me under the shadow of they wings,* that is, under the protection of the angels; Psalm 90: "For he hath given his angels charge over thee" etc.

Or, the two wings are the two arms of Christ extended on the cross; Deuteronomy 32: "He spread his wings, and hath taken them and carried them on his shoulders."

Next, he shows from which (things) it is suitable to be freed, namely *From the face of the wicked who have afflicted me,* that is from the power and presence of the demons, or of false brothers; 2 Corinthians 11: "In perils from false brethren." *Who have afflicted me* with temptations and persecutions; Exodus 1: "The Egyptians hated the children of Israel and afflicted them and mocked them." In this way we ought to seek to be freed from sin; Ecclesiasticus 21: "Flee from sins as from the face of a serpent."

*My enemies.* Here he sets down the necessity of (his) freedom. Concerning this, he does two things. First, he sets forth the affliction which he suffers, and second, an image of (this) affliction, at, *They have taken me.* Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he presents the affliction, and second, the mode of the affliction, at, *Fat* etc.

And so, he says *Enemies,* demons, or sins, afflict me in such a fashion that they *Have surrounded my soul,* that is, they have enclosed (me) on all sides, such that I will not find freedom's path. He says *Soul* because they seek nothing other than (his) soul. Bodily enemies seek to take (one's) life, while spiritual enemies seek the soul.

Or, it can be understood of Christ, whose soul the Jews surrounded with their malice; Psalm 117: "They surrounded me like bees" etc.; Psalm 21: Many dogs have surrounded me, the council of evildoers besets me."

Next, he sets down the mode (of his affliction); thus he says *Fat.* Fat, in the Scriptures, is understood sometimes in a good, and sometimes in a bad way. (It is understood in the former) in as much as it signifies a devotion of the mind; Psalm 62: "Let my soul be filled as with marrow and fatness." (It is understood) in a bad way, first as it signifies wickedness of heart, second, of the mouth, and third of (one's) works: and in this fashion (fat) designates detestable wickedness; Job 21: "His bowels are full of fat, and his bones are moistened with marrow. And this is manifold. Sometimes (there is) pleasure in the sin that they committ; Proverbs 2: "Who are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in most wicked things." Also, pride and falseness; Job 11: "A vain man is lifted up into pride, and thinketh himself born free like a wild ass's colt." Also, carnal sensuality. Therefore, he says, *Their fat,* that is, carnal sensuality, either pride or pleasure: *They have shut up,* in themselves so that they do not take hold of the spiritual meaning.

Jerome has "In their fat, that is, they have shut me up in an abundance of temporal and secular power."

Secondly, with respect to their mouth, *Their mouth hath spoken proudly.* And this when the Jews spoke against Christ; Matthew 27: "If he be the king of Israel (let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him"

Thirdly, with respect to their work. And he first shows how (the wicked) proceed to (their) work, and second, its cause, at, *Their eyes.* In (their) activity, he sets down two things. First, a defect, and second, the solicitude to injure. However, when one despises, one is not solicitous to do harm: and so he says *Those who cast (me) forth,* that is, those who despise (me); Isaiah 33: "He hath rejected the cities, he hath not regarded the men (and yet they have surrounded me on all sides carefully with solicitude"). And this the Jews did to Christ when they ejected him from the city; cf. Luke 2. *And they have surrounded me,* those comming to the spectacle so that they might mock (him); cf. Acts 7. The reason for this is that they care not for God, but rather for earthly things; Psalm 3: "There is no salvation for him in his God."

*They have set their eyes bowing down to the earth,* namely sinners have set the intention of their heart bowing down to the earth with deliberation and delay; Proverbs 17: "The eyes of fools", that is, of sinners, "are in the ends of the earth", and as such they do not receive the light of grace; Ecclesiastes 2: "The eyes of a wise man are in his head; the fool", that is, the sinner, "walketh in darkness", that is, in his sins; Daniel 13: "They have turned away their eyes, that they might not look unto heaven." And exactly this was done among the Jews when they said at John 11: "(if we let him alone so, all will believe in him); and the Romans will come and take away our place and nation."

Or, *to the earth* (could mean) "at the flesh of Christ", whose infirmity they regarded so much, but not his divinity, as if to say, "They have set their eyes (upon the flesh of Christ").

Concerning (their) diligence, a likeness is set down with respect to its violence, *As a lion prepared for the prey, they have taken me,* either from God, or from Pilate's soldiers. (A likeness is also set down) with respect to fraud, *And as a young lion dwelling in secret places.* The lion attacks in open spaces, but her young, remaining hidden, consume or attack the prey once seized; cf. Matthew 26. For he was betrayed by a kiss, taken by night, condemned by false witnesses and the high priest tore his own clothing.

*Arise.* Here he sets down another petition, namely for the defeat of his enemies. He sets down three things. First, his petition, second, an explanation, at, *Deliver my soul,* and third, the reason for his petition, at *From (thy) hidden (stores).* Concerning the first he does two things. First, he asks for the concealment of (His) help, and second, the destruction of his adversaries.

Thus, he says, "You seem to sleep when you allow me to be afflicted, but *Arise, O Lord, disappoint him"* so that you might come to my assistance more quickly than he is able to harm (me): *And supplant him,* that is, forsake him, as it were, in a shrewd way; Job 5: "Who catcheth the wise in their craftiness"; Proverbs 19: "The folly of a man supplanteth his steps". *Supplant him* in a two-fold way, first, in my freedom. And with respect to this, he says, *Deliver my soul from the wicked one* because he persecutes me contrary to justice, and is thus wicked; Psalm 42: "Deliver me from the unjust and deceitful man." The reason for this is that my soul is a spear, that is a *sword* sharpened on both sides by which the devil was destroyed. And this is properly said of Christ's soul; Isaiah 27: "in that day the Lord with his hard...and strong sword shall visit Leviathan." He says *Thy sword from the enemies of thy hand* complete *deliver;* Psalm 68: "Attend to my soul and deliver it."

Or, *Deliver thy sword from the enemies,* that is, take (their) sword and power which they have from you (Wisdom 6: "Power was given to you by God"), and the will which they have from themselves (Zacharias 13: "Awake the sword against my shepherd").

Or, *Supplant them,* (secondly) in their deception: *And deliver my soul from the enemies of thy hand,* that is, of Christ your son: for a son is said to be the hand of his father; Deuteronomy 32: "I will lift up my hand to heaven", that is, my son.

*O Lord, divide them from the few of the earth* that for this the former persecute me, so that the latter may establish their own kingdom. This passage is two-fold: in the Roman version, it is thus: "O Lord disperse them in their life", as if to say, "They have their very eyes to the earth, and thus they do evil; but you, exclude them from the earth which you have given to them." But how? That they may go about in one place? No, but disperse them throughout the world.

In the other version, "O Lord, release them from the few of the earth", as if to say, "Divide them from the earth and *From the few,* that is from the society of the elect, *In their life,* that is while they live.

Or, it is written that they were warned by an angel of their immanent destruction and the faithful withdrew and went into the kingdom of Agrippa. And so, *Divide them from the few,* that is, from Christians who have been preserved.

*Their belly is filled from hidden stores,* that is, from (their) sins not confessed; Proverbs 28: "He that hideth his sins will not be guided"; Job 31: "If as a man I have hid my sin, and have concealed my iniquity in my bosom."

Or, the reason for (his) petition is set down here. And this reason is two-fold, namely because it can be referred to (their) sins, or to the benefices concerning which they are ungrateful. If in the first way, he thus sets down the abundance of (their) sins. If in the second way, he shows how the benefices of God were distributed to (His) sons.

He thus says with regard to the first, *Their belly is filled from hidden stores,* that is, from (their) sins, which were hidden from themselves, not that he does not see, but that he does not want to see them; Habacuc 1: "Thy eyes, O Lord, are too pure to behold evil, and thou canst not look on iniquity." *Their belly,* that is, their conscience, or memory, or carnal concupiscence, or sensuality, *is filled.*

*They are full of children,* that is of sins, or of evil works. The latter are called the children of the evil, just as good works are (referred to as) the children of the good.

Another version has, *They are full of swine's flesh,* that is, with the impurity of sins; and it is his explanation that says (it is) *From hidden stores...and they have left the rest to their little ones,* as if to say, they are drawn off to (their) children who have imitated their sins; Wisdom 4: "For the children that are born of unlawful beds are witnesses of wickedness against their parents in their trial."

Or, *They are full of children,* that is, of the advantage of (their) children, *And they have left the rest to their little ones,* who bound them to sin in so far as it was in them; Matthew 27: "His blood be upon us and upon our children."

Or, *They are full of children,* that is, on behalf of (their) children, as if, thus full of sins, which meet both their need and their children's, the remaining sins, which they themselves have not committed, they have left for their children to be done.

If (we consider the second reason for his petition), they have thus received two benefices. First, a spiritual benefice, the law. And so he says, *From hidden stores,* of your wisdom, *Their belly is full,* that is, their carnal sense; Psalm 147: "He hath not done in like manner to every nation." Second, (the benefice of) temporal goods, because *They are full of children,* and because it is more, they leave these to them.

At this place (in the text), Jerome's version has "Deliver my soul from the wicked one", as if the wicked one were your sword; Isaiah 10: "Woe to the Assyrian, the rod of anger, by the men of your hand, who died in the depths, whose part it is in life", as if he were saying, "Deliver my soul from the wicked one", that is, from Saul, "and from the men of your hand" who have contradicted your hand. Those "who died in the depths", that is, in sin. "Whose part it is in life", namely those very ones "whose belly is filled" etc.

According to the Gloss, "Saul" signifies "death", and just as with the death of Saul, David reigned in peace, so too Christ banished death after the resurrection.

*But as for me.* Here he shows the hope of his having been heard. And he describes two things, namely the justice which he possesses, and the vision of God. And these two follow in order, for through justice one arrives at the vision of God; Psalm 14: "Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle...He that walketh without blemish and worketh justice."

Another version has "But as for me, I will see your face in justice" and thus "I will appear before thy sight", that is, I will come to you to be seen.

*And I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear,* that is, when I see you, I will be filled with every good; Psalm 102: "Who satisfieth thy desire with good things", namely your glory in which are all good things. The others are filled with swine's flesh according to the Septuagint.

Our version says *In the land of the holy* etc.; Isaiah 26: "Destroy the wicked man lest he see the glory of God." *And I shall be satisfied;* Jeremiah 3: "When he appears we will be like unto him."
