# Section 1 — Psalm 18

**(a) [To the end, A Psalm of David] The heavens tell of the glory of God, and the firmament announces the works of his hands**

**(b) Day belches the word to day, and night indicates knowledge to night.**

**There are no discourses, nor speeches, of which the voices are not heard.**

**Their sound has gone out to the entire world, and their words have gone to the ends of the circle of the earth.**

**(c) He has put his tabernacle in the sun, and the sun like a bridegroom going forth from his bedroom.**

**He rejoices like a giant to run the way.**

**(d) His going forth is from the highest sky, and his going around is right to its top, and there is no one who hides from his heat.**

**(e) The law of the Lord is without blemish, converting souls, and the testimony of the Lord is faithful, giving wisdom to the small ones.**

**The justices of the Lord are right, giving joy to hearts; the precept of the Lord is shining giving light to eyes.**

**(f) The fear of the Lord is holy remaining for the age of the age; the judgments of the Lord are true, justified unto themselves.**

**(g) They are desirable more than gold, and much precious stone, and they are sweeter than honey and honeycomb.**

**Indeed your servant keeps them: in keeping them there is much reward.**

**(h) Who can understand his own wrongdoings? Cleanse me of my hidden things, and spare your servant from foreign thing.**

**(i) If they shall not take dominion over me, then I will be without stain, and I will be cleansed from the greatest wrongdoing. And the words of my mouth will be to please, and the meditation of my heart will be in your sight always.**

**O Lord, my helper, and my redeemer.**

(a) Above the Psalmist has many times offered thanks for benefits given and hoped for; from the consideration of those benefits he rises in praise of the benefactor.

The title is clear: *To the end, A Psalm of David.*

According to the letter it refers to David, but according to the mystery it refers to Christ.

*To the end.*

This psalm is divided into two parts.

In the first part God is commended because of the erudition by which he instructs us.

This is done in two ways.

In one part it is general, relating equally to all, and this is manifested by his works.

Romans 1. "The invisible things of God are seen through the things that are made, when those things are understood."

The other way regards what is specific, through law-giving, which is only to the faithful.

According to the verse, *The law of the Lord is without blemish.* This psalm according to the truth is expounded about Christ, because the Apostle draws upon this psalm as an authoritative source about the mystery of Christ, in Romans 1.

*Their sound has gone out to the whole earth, and their words to the ends of the circle of the earth.*

Nonetheless, as the mysteries of Christ are represented figuratively sometimes in the figures of the Old Testament, so sometimes they are shown in the figures of holy works.

And thus first this psalm is expounded in terms of the figure, second in terms of the truth.

First it speaks of the heavens, second of the sun.

By the heavens one understands the Apostles, by the sun, one understands Christ.

*In the sun.*

On this topic he does two things. First he presents the doctrine by which God teaches us by the skies, however one may understand skies; second, he excludes the things that would impede this doctrine, where he says *Day belches forth the word to day, etc.*

One must understand two things about God.

One is the glory of God, in which glory he is glorious; second, his works.

If we regard the physical skies, these proclaim the glory of God to us: because in them is a marvelous and ordered distinction, which is a certain overflowing of his infinite glory.

Eccli. 43. "The beauties of the sky, the glories of the stars, the Lord giving light to the world in the highest things."

And since the sun as it gives light looks through all things, and the Lord's work is full of his glory; therefore these material skies are understood so as to indicate the glory of God to us, not as material animals, as Rabbi Moses said, but in its beauty, by which their craftsman is much better judged.

And the firmament shows us how magnificent God is.

The firmament is called the sky, as it says in Genesis 1. "God called the firmament the sky."

It is called the sky, however, according to distinction, and so in the distinction of the skies the divine wisdom appears: if the whole is taken at once, is thus proclaims his power, and so it says that *the skies proclaim*, that is, they manifest, *the glory of God, and the firmament proclaims the works of his hands.*

According to the truth, however, by the skies the Apostles are understood, in whom God resides as in the skies.

And they are called the skies on account of the sublimity of their behavior.

Phil. 5. "Our way of life is in the heavens."

Again they are covered in stars because of the abundances of many virtues.

Eccl. 43. "The beauties of the sky, the glory of the stars."

Isa. 55. "As the heavens are raised above the earth, etc."

Because they are shining by teaching and example.

Matth. 5. "So let your light shine before men so they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in the heavens."

They are quickly flying by obedience and by the discourse of preaching.

Eccl. 14 "I alone have gone around the circle of the sky, and I have walked in the waves of the sea, and I have penetrated the depth of the abyss, and I have stood in every land, and in the midst of every people, and I have held first place among every nation."

They "proclaim the glory of God", specifically of the Father, in which glory is Christ, and since Christy is equal to the Father, and is God, and forgives sings for free.

Isaiah 12. "You have been bought for free, and you are redeemed without silver."

Again, the Apostles are called the firmament, because they have been made firm by virtue of the Holy Spirit."

Luke (the end): "Remain in the city until you are clothed with virtue from on high."

*And they announce the work of his hands*; that is, the marvels that Christ worked, namely the nativity, passion, resurrection and ascension.

Eccl. 42: "Has not God made the saints tell all his marvels?"

Isaiah 12. "Announce this through the whole earth." Ps. 95. *Announce his glory among the nations, his marvels among all the peoples."*

Or, *The heavens tell etc.*

Since the heavens sent a new star announcing the rise of the Saviour.

Matth. 2. "We have seen his star in the east."

(b) *Day.*

Here he excludes an impediment to doctrine: and he excludes a threefold impediment.

Sometimes a doctrine is impeded so that it cannot be learned on account of the time, sometimes on account of a variety of languages, sometimes on account of a diversity of places.

The first impediment concerns the night.

The night is not the time for reading, since it is the time for resting, and different times are right for teaching and learning.

And first we should speak of the material days that are caused according to nature by the movement of the sky; and thus we should consider not only the substance of the heavens, but also the motion of the firmament, and so we should gather wisdom in this changing.

Eccl. 33. "Why is one day better than another day, and one light better than another light, and one year better than another by the sun? They have been separated by the Lord's knowledge," that is, they have been arranged from on high.

And thus he says: *One day*, then *proclaims the word to another day, that is, the day of wisdom, that is, it manifests the order and goodness of divine wisdom, insofar as one day is greater than another, etc.*

One day is a greater season than another, and so it is with each particular day.

*And night.*

He shows above the divine wisdom, and the order of the divine disposition, since one night follows another in orderly fashion, since *one day announces*, since the daytime is the time for speaking, and so it is the time of the word.

On this account he says, *It announces the word.*

But the night-time is the time of meditation because of the quiet, and so in the quiet of night a man meditates, and he discovers many things from which he becomes knowledgeable; and so the night is the time of knowledge.

And so he says: *And one night*, then, *indicates knowledge to another night*, namely the knowledge of God; because there is another arrangement of time in one night that in another; and this all is from God's knowledge which arranges it.

According to the truth that Apostles are called Apostles, *they announces the word*, the word of divine wisdom, *to the day*, that is, to those who are perfect.

Cor. 2 (the beginning): "We speak knowledge among those who are perfect."

Not all things are preached to all people, but clear things to those who are clear; holy things to those who are holy, and great things to those who are great.

Again the Apostle: insofar as it is night, that is, one is living in the flesh, and mortal, and condescending to the weakness and ignorance of those who are uneducated as one night points something to another night, that is, pointing at knowledge for the perfect, but concerning human matters.

Cor. 3 (beginning) "I could not speak to you as to spiritual people, but as if to carnal people. As to little children, I have given you milk in Christ, not food."

Or, *One day*, that is Gabriel, *announces the word to another day*, that is, to the Blessed Virgin he sets forth the word of the Saviour; but *one night*, that is the devil, *shows knowledge to another night*, that is, to Eve.

Genesis 3: "You will be like gods, knowing good and evil."

Again, in the second place doctrine is impeded according to the variety of languages, but this is doctrine is not impeded on this account, because *there are no phrases, nor words*, that is, whatever may be the languages or nations, they can be taught of the divine wisdom and power, whether by the heavens or by the apostles.

But it should be said according to the truth that there are not speeches whose *words are not heard*, because the sounds of their voices, or preachings, or the doctrine of the Apostles is heard by each and every one.

But there are two opinions concerning the speech of the Apostles. Some say that the Apostles spoke in one tongue, but others say that all understood them.

But what the Apostle says in I Corinthians 14 is contrary to this: "I give thanks to my God, that I speak in the language of all of you."

Hence *there are no speeches* in which they are not heard to speak.

"Loquelae" signify the chief languages, but "sermones" signify the varieties of idioms in each language.

Or, "loquelae" languages, and "sermones" are ways of speaking.

There are three ways of speaking.

There is the humble way which we speak in common; another way is when our speech is colorful, and another is when our speach is merely ornate.

The first way is right for one who is teaching; the second way is right for one who is persuading; and the third way is right for one who is seeking to delight his hearers; and the Apostles spoke in all of these modes.

Isaiah 28: "I will speak to this people in the speach of lips, and in another tongue."

Again, diversity and distance of place are an impediment to doctrine.

Because a doctrine sometimes does not reach remote places, but this is not the case with this doctrine, because *their sound has gone out unto all the earth*, namely, the sound of the heavens, or of the Apostles, because the doctrine by which the heavens teach is everywhere.

But it is better said of the Apostles, because it says the *sound*, that is, the reputation or renown, has *gone out*, not that they have left, *and their words unto the ends of the earth*, because a sound reaches far-off places, and words reach close places.

But this is not the case with the Apostles, rather even their words, which is the distinction of sound, have reached the ends of the earth, whether a prophecy or the knowledge of miracles.

(c) *In the sun.*

Above, the psalm mentions the heavens, and here, in order to show the praise of the creator, he mentions the sun.

As by the heavens, we understand the Apostles, so also by the sun we understand Christ.

Malachias 4: "The sun of justice will arise for you who fear my name."

And some prophecies say this of Christ under the figure of the sun.

Thus, he first presents the figure by which he begins to explain the truth about Christ.

He presents three things concerning the figure.

First there is the position of the sun, then its motion, *and he like a bridegroom*; and third the effect of the sun *There is no one who can hide himself etc..."*

First, we should know that Jerome has a different wording for this: *He set a tabernacle (a tent) for the sun in them;* as if to say: *Thus the heavens tell etc.* and for them, namely the heavens, *he has set his tabernacle (pitched his tent), that is, he has placed him in the heavens.*

The tabernacle is set, or the tent pitched, fittingly, because this world is the place of the wayfarers, not of those who dwell in a certain place, because they are in continual motion.

The words as we have them say: *in the sun he has set his tabernacle (pitched his tent)*

The house of a lord would be more beautiful in the city than in the country; and so the tabernacle of God seems more beautiful in heaven.

The sun is his tabernacle: not that God is contained in a place, but because, as Dionysius says, the goodness and power of God, the divine power, are most greatly represented in the sun.

He says two things concerning the movement of the sun: *from the height of heaven.*

Note that he speaks of the sky as it is in its change, which is the end of the night and the beginning of the day.

And as it is the end of the night, it is only the departure from the hidden to that which is plainly apparent: because the sun does not rise in the sense of just beginning to exist, but in the sense that now it's presence is made apparent; and thus he likens the sun to a bridegroom coming out of his bedchamber, because as the bridegroom is hidden in the bedchamber, so the sun is hidden from the night: and so he says: *he, like a groom, coming forth from his bedchamber.*

Considering the sun as the principle or beginning of the day, he presents four things: the sun's property or efficacy, its magnitude, the velocity, and the regularity of its motion.

He presents the sun's property, because the night suggests sadness, but the day brings joy.

Psalm 29. *Weeping will remain to the evening, but joy to the day.*

And so he says, "he rejoiced."

Magnitude, because the sun is great among all particular physical things; and so he says: *as a giant*. Speed; hence he says: *to run*. Regularity, hence he says, *the way*, because the sun does not depart from the rightness of its way as do some planets.

Again, he explains this similarity when he says, from the highest sky. What is said here can be understood in two ways. In one way, that there are two points according to the astronomers, namely the highest part of the heavens, where the son is at noon, and the opposite point which is the angle (corner) or the earth, where the son is in the middle of the night: et this is what he says, *from the highest sky his going out*, according to those who would begin the day from midnight, *and his course unto its height*, with respect to the angle of the sky where it is at noon.

But if *height* refers to one point, it is the one point where the sun is at midday. And this is because according to the astronomers most days are counted from midday; as if he were to say: from the point of midday is his (the sun's) return, to the other place: Eccl. 1: the sun rises and falls, and returns to its place.

Its effects are shown when he says, nor is there anyone who may hide himself from his heat; as if he were to say, the sun at midday so burns the earth, and is so hot that in some lands man barely survives: Eccl. 43: At midday he burns the earth, and in the face of his burning heat who can stand? But according to the thing signified the mysteries of Christ are designated.

And first His conception is designated. Second, his nativity. Third, his development. Fourth, his ascension. His conception is designated when it says *in the sun he has placed his tabernacle*. It is customary that by tabernacle or tent one understands the body: 2 Peter 1: I know that the time for folding up my tent is coming quickly, because Our Lord Jesus Christ told me: 2 Cor. 5: we who are in this tent weep.

Therefore what he says *in the sun he has placed etc.*, is that he has placed his body in the sun, that is, in the Blessed Virgin, who had no darkness of sin: Cant. 4: You are completely beautiful, my woman friend, and there is no blemish in you.

Or, there are three characteristics of the sun. It shines, it burns, and it distinguishes various times. *In the sun he has placed his tabernacle*, that is, in plain sight, because although He was invisible, by assuming His Body He became visible. John 1: The Word was made flash, and dwelt among us. Again, *in the sun*, that is, in burning heat, *he has placed his tabernacle*, that is, his body, because he took the ability to suffer: Isaiah 53: Truly he has taken up our afflictions, and he has borne our sorrows.

Again, he subjected himself to change: He who as God was eternal, as man become temporal: Ps. 30: In your hands are my times. Or, *his tabernacle*, that is, the Church: Apoc. 21: Behold the tabernacle of God with men. *He placed in the sun*, that is, in plain sight: Matth. 5: A city built upon a mount cannot be hidden. The nativity or birth is designated when it says, *he like a bridegroom proceeding from his chamber.* The chamber is the virginal womb: from this he proceeds like a bridegroom, because in this perpetual union he has espoused human nature: hence in death His Divinity remained united to his soul and body: Os. 2: I will espouse you to myself in faith.

The course and development of his life is described by joy. Hence, he rejoiced, that is, he rejoiced inwardly with a spiritual joy, which neither death nor any sadness in sensuality could disturb: because He also experienced this joy in his passion: Isaiah 42: he will be neither sad or disturbed; because there was no sadness in his higher part from the sadness of sensuality: however the whole suffered as nature; nor as being turned toward God. Again he is described by magnitude: because as a giant of twin substance: because He is of divine nature in which he is great: Ps. 76: who is a great God as etc., and He was also great with respect to his human nature: Luke 1: he will be great: etc.. The course of his life is also described by speed: because he worked our salvation in a short time: hence the psalm says *to run the way*. Acts 10: he passed through doing good and healing, as if speedily.

(d) From the height. Here he goes on to talk about the Ascension. He does three things with respect to this. First, he sets forth the due ascension. Second, its end point. Third, he sets forth its due effect.

First, when he says, *his going out from the highest sky*. It is natural for each thing to tend to its place, the place connatural to it. The highest natural place rightfully belongs to him who has the highest nature. Christ was born from the Father having the highest nature: Eph. 4: he who has descended, is he who ascended. And so the psalm says: *from the highest sky his going out*, namely, by eternal generation. And he says, *from the highest*, not from the ethereal or empyrean heavens or any other; but from the being of the Trinity, since He is consubstantial with the Father, the same in essence. Then he set forth the end point, when he says, *and his course is all the way to its height*: John 15: I have gone forth from the Father, and I have come into the world: again I will leave the world and go to the Father.

The effect follows: nor is there anyone who may hide himself from its heat: Ephesians 4: *He has given gifts to men.*. In the same passage it reads: *He has ascended above all the heavens to fulfill all things.*

Thus Christ, when he had ascended, send the Holy Spirit to his disciples; hence it says: Nor is there anyone who may hide himself from its heat.

The Holy Spirit warms: Songs 8: His lamps are lamps of fire. But do not many receive his warmth? It is to be said that as it is with the material sun, so it is the case with the Holy Spirit.

Many, however, can hide themselves, and not receive the warmth of the sun, but the sun for its part shows itself to all; so the Holy Spirit is poured out everywehre, and asks to be received by all, except if someone hides himself out of malice.

Or, there is no one who may hide himself etc.: because although the sinner may not receive Him, yet he cannot hide from being known by Him. Prov. 15: hell and perdition before the face of the Lord.

(e) The Law. Above the psalmist spoke of his general instruction, which comes by way of creatures; now he speaks of the special instruction which comes by way of legislation: and he does two things in this regard. First he presents a commendation of the law. Second, he speaks of the offenses which are committed against the law, where he says, who understands his offenses.

It is right that after treating the mysteries of Christ's incarnation, he speaks of the Old Law, which was fulfilled by Christ, and the New Law that was passed on: and he does two things in this regard. First, he shows the goodness or rectitude of the law. Second, he shows its gentleness or love, where he writes: desirable things.

With regard to the first, he does three things. First, he commends the law in general. Second, he commends those things contained in the law, where he writes: the testimony of the Lord. Third, he commends the things associated with the Law, where he writes: the fear of the Lord.

It is to be considered taht he says two things concerning the law of the Lord: first that it is immaculate, and that it is converting: and this may refer to either law, the Old Law and the New Law: and it is compared to the difference in human law, in which certain illicit things are permitted, such as usury and prostitution, for (the human law) cannot correct all things.

But the law of the Lord is not such, but it is immaculate, that is, it excludes all that is evil: Psalm 11: the sayings of the Lord are pure sayings, etc.. Job 6: you will not find iniquity in my tongue, nor will folly sound forth in my throat.

Again, human law extends only to things that belong to human judgment, namely, to exterior things: 1 Kings 16: Man sees what appears, but God sees the heart.

And so the human law draws (man) away from exterior things, but the divine law turns the heart to God; and so he says "it converts", not only exterior acts, but souls as well.

But the Old law did this imperfectly, while the New Law does it perfectly: because the Old Law works through temporal punishments that force one's hand; but the New Law works through eternal punishments, which work upon the heart.

Three things, however, are contained in the law: testimonies, judgements, and precepts. Testimonies, because the Divine Law proceeds by necessity over any credulity: Heb. 11: he who approaches the Lord must believe.

And so testimonies are necessary by which the right faith of a man is tested; and so in the matter of this faith there are testimonies and ceremonies. And he says two things about these: that testimonies or precepts have something faithful (or trustworthy), and that they exhibit wisdom. However, human doctrines have something that is not faithful (or trustworthy), nor do these doctrines exhibit wisdom.

Something not faithful or trustworthy, because in ancient times men put certain falsehoods in their laws, as it seemed to them to be useful for their cities; for example, that certain men were born of the gods, so that they would possess great minds or spirits; and that those who ruled well were changed into gods, to give a soul, as it were, to the good of the republic.

But the Lord's testimony, that is (His) teaching, or the divine command is faith, that is, it has truth; but the other, namely the teaching of the others, is false: Psalm 92: "Thy testimonies, O Lord, are become exceedingly credible:" and this because that law orders those things which are only in that very life; but the divine law orders (those things which are) for (or towards) the future life.

Rom. 8: The sufferings of this time cannot compare to the future glory that will be revealed within us. Testimonies are properly spoken of in the law when these testimonies give birth to the authority of the lawgiver in the heart of his subjects, so that they obey his precepts; that God is one, that He is the Creator of heaven and earth, and other such testimonies.

And since the ceremonial precepts are entirely from the due divine authority, they can be called testimonies; the moral precepts, on the other hand, are grounded in what is due in these of every virtue; the judicial precepts are grounded in what is due regarded contracts between men. The human law, however, does not exhibit wisdom: for there is a certain wisdom in human laws, where there is a certain truth, such as philosophical truth: and there is a certain wisdom that the priests employed in the temple, and this wisdom is false: and this false wisdom was set forth to many men;

But the philosophical wisdom was set forth to few men, whereas the divine wisdom was set forth to the little ones, because it was set forth to peoples: Deut. 4: This is your wisdom and understanding before the peoples. Matth. 11: You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to the little ones.

The justices of the Lord are right, that is, the judgments spoken of in Exodus 22: he who has stolen a cow or sheep etc... Isa. 26: The right path of the just to walk: Prov. 21: It is a joy for the just to do justice, and a cause of trembling to those who do iniquity.

And he says two things concerning these: (first that they are) right, and (second that they are) delightful. Right, because they pertain to justice. Right is said of the just: Proverbs 8: "All my words are just, there is nothing wicked nor perverse in them. They are right to them that understand..." Delightful, (because they are) not severe and disturbing, since they are mixed with equity. Hence he says, they make the heart rejoice, on account of equity and the hope of reward: Ps. 118: I will rejoice over your words. The moral precepts are shiny and illuminating; hence he says: the precept of the Lord is shiny.

It is called shiny, because in itself it is manifest and evident, for example, you shall not kill, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, and the like: these have within them clarity, so each and every man is obliged to hold them and say, Prov. 6: the command is a lantern, and the law a light.

That which is heeded according to the rule of a superior is called a precept; a precept concerns things that are to be done, and implies an obligation to do something in him who has been commanded: this obligation is either on part of the divine rule that we are obliged to follow, and thus that fall under the obligation without which the order of reason cannot be preserved: or it is an obligation flowing from the authority of the one who commands, whom we are obliged to obey: or on the part of the end that we desire, which is set forth for us; and then under the precept falls that without which we cannot preserve our state of being subject to the one who commands; or without which we cannot achieve the intended end.

The term precept means "taken precisely", that is, with respect to that which should be done; as if we are held to do that exactly: and such a precept is the following: illuminating the eyes, that is, the eyes of the reason, which eyes are darkened by the unrestrained desire for exterior things and by the desires of the passions within: and the precept of the Lord removes this, and so it illuminates the eyes.

Give light to me eyes, lest I ever sleep in death, Psal. 12.

(f) *Fear.* Here (the psalmist) sets down certain things surrounding the law, one of which is on our part, namely fear, which leads us to follows (his) precepts: Ecclesiates 12: "Fear God and keep his commands."

Concerning fear itself he says two things. First, he calls it holy. Second, he calls it permanent.

Now, all fear is caused by love, since a man fears to lose that which he loves. And thus, just as there is a twofold love, so too is there a twofold fear. On the one hand, there is a holy fear which is caused by a holy love, while on the other, there is a fear which is not holy, a fear which is caused by a love which is not holy. A holy love is that by which God is loved; Romans 5: "The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us." This holy fear effects three things. First, one fears to offend God. Second, one is unwilling to be separated from Him. Third, one submitts oneself to God through reverence. And this very fear is called pious and filial.

A fear which is not holy is that which is caused by a love which is not holy, which is of the world, and of one's self. And from that sort of love which is not holy, a twofold fear which is not holy is caused. (First, there is that fear which is) servile, that which is from a love of one's self. (Second, there is that fear which is) worldly, that which proceeds from a love of the world; Matthew 10: "Fear ye not them that kill the body" etc. Of a holy fear (it is said at) Psalm 33: "Fear the Lord, all ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him." A worldly fear endures only with the world, (while) a servile (fear) endures in the evil in perpetuity. But a holy fear endures in the good. Concerning this, the Psalm states *The fear of the Lord is holy remaining for the age of the age.*

On the contrary, (there is the passage from) 1 John 4 (which states): "Perfect charity casteth out fear."

I answer that charity expells servile fear, but filial fear endures in heaven in a twofold fashion. First, insofar as it is to us a reward; Psalm 9: "The patience of the poor shall not perish for ever." Not that there is patience there, since there is no tribulation there. Rather, its fruit: and in this manner the fruit of fear endures; Ecclesiasticus 1: "With him that feareth the Lord, it shall go well in the latter end, and in the day of his death he shall be blessed."

Or, (fear) remains according to its own activity. Not that one fears to offend, since one does not fear sin there. Nor (does one fear) separation. But (one fears) with respect to (the activity of) reverence. For they submitt themselves to God, and do not dare to make themselves equal to him; Job 26: "The pillars of heaven tremble, and dread at his beck."

On God's part, there is his judgment, which is called the execution of justice; Psalm 93: "Until justice be turned into judgment." And this will come about as he punishes or rewards; and thus *The judgments of the Lord* are said to be *True and justified:* true according to rectitude, since in these (his judgments) there is always truth; Romans 2: "The judgment(s) of God (are), according to truth, against them that do such things:" for (these judgments do) not follow human *Testimonies,* but are said to be *Justified unto themselves,* since (they do) not follow upon some superior law, but (are) *Unto themselves.*

Or, because in themselves, the judgments of the Lord have obvious justice; Psalm 36: "And he will bring forth thy justice as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday."

(g) *Desirable things.* Above the psalmist commended the divine law with regard to its rectitude; here he commends it for its sweetness and joy: and here he does two things. First he presents the commendation of the Divine Law. Second, he proved this commendation, where he says, and your servant. He prefers the law to the soul's desire for all the things of the world.

In worldly things, external riches and bodily pleasures are desired. And the love of the law of God is above these things. With respect to the first he says the things that were said: more desirable than gold: Prov. 8: Wisdom is better than all the most precious treasures, and no desirable thing can be compared to it: Ps. 118: I have loved your commands more than gold, etc., and he mentions the two things that men desire; hence he says, gold, and displays, hence he says, precious stone.

Precious stones serve no purpose except appearance: and there much can be referred, either to stone, or to precious. Again with respect to the second he says, and sweeter than honey or honeycomb. Psal. 118: how sweet to my throat are your words.

More than honey to my mouth. It is called honey and honeycombed, in comparison to bodily pleasures. Honey is extracted from wax; but honeycombed is honey and wax. Bodily pleasures sometimes are manifest, and such is honey; sometimes they are hidden and more sweet, and such is honeycomb: Prov. 9: stolen waters are sweeter etc.. Or they are preferred to honeycomb on account of the Old Testament, in which there is honey in honeycomb, truth in a figure: they are preferred to honey on account of the New Testament which is manifest truth.

But are spiritual delights more delightful? The answer is yes: and for a threefold reason. For one, on part of the good we delight in, which is a more powerful good, and for reason of the delight, which is a greater good, therefore more delightful. Second, on part of the potency that takes delight, because the intellectual faculty is stronger than the sensitive faculty. Third, because of the mode of the delights.

Bodily delights consist in becoming and in motion; such as in foods and other things. Motion, however, is something imperfect; and it implies something future and past; because the whole is not possessed at once. Spiritual delights, however, are not in motion: because they consist in loving and understanding the good that is not in motion; but accidentally bodily delights are more desired, insofar as some abound in the senses and fall short in intellect.

Or else, holy men love the precepts of God more than themselves. And the holy men are designated by gold and precious stone: 1 Cor. 3: If anyone shall build upon this foundation with gold, silver, precious stones. Again, by honey and honeycomb are signified those who are strangers to the things of the world; but those are honeycomb who still delight in the things of the world: and such men, because they are not completely strangers to the things of the world, love themselves more than they love the precepts; others love the precepts more than themselves.

And he proves this in two ways. First by experience. Second by effect. By experience, when he says, for indeed you servant keeps them; as if to say: I can say that they are sweet, because I have tried them: for I love and experience them. Now, no one can give testimony except he who experiences: John 7: if anyone wishes to do his will, he will know whether my teaching is from God, or whether I speak from my self: Job 23: my feet have followed his tracks.

From the effect, that is, from the reward, he proves the same thing, when he says, there is great reward in keeping the precepts: Matth. 5: rejoice and exult, because your reward is abundant in heaven. And he does not say "for the act of keeping"; but "in the keeping of them", because the very act of keeping them is itself a great reward, namely, the glory of the heart and cleanliness: 2 Cor. 1: this is our glory, the testimony of our conscience. And thus the law is commended for honesty, when he says, in the keeping of them etc., because the honest is the same as virtue; and this is appetible on its own account.

(h) *Offenses.* Here he prays for the offenses of those who have transgressed the law. First, he sets forth the hiding of sins. Second, he asks for their remission, where he says "from hidden sins". Third, he presents the reason for the petition, where he says "if my...". Therefore he says: we have frequently broken the law, but who understands his offenses? As if to say, no one.

There are three reasons for this. First, the offense blinds the eyes of the sinners, hence small sins are not easily seen: Wisdom 2: Their malice has blinded them. Second, because there are many sins: Psalm 39: Evils without number surrounded me. My iniquities captured me, and I was not able to see.

Again on account of their subtlety: Ps. 39: They are greater in number than the hairs on my head, on account of their subtlety: but he does not say "sins" but "offenses". Sin is twofold: the sin of transgression which is easily recognized, because the man knows that he has done a wrong act.

Then there is the sin of omission, and this is more difficult to recognize, because these do not always oblige, but at certain places and times. It is difficult to state when the place and time are right: and when alms are to be given, how, where etc. Consequently he presents the remission of sins.

However, there are two kinds of sin. One kind has its beginning with us; and this is chiefly original sin, and then carnal sins, which proceed from the corruption of tinder (translator's note: tinder as a metaphor for our excitable faculties); and these stain the soul, because they join the soul to earthly things. And so he says, cleanse me from my hidden offenses, that is, from the things that proceed from a hidden root, or else, the things that happen in a hidden place, or the things that arise from a secret desire: Eph. 5: it is foul to speak of the things that are done by them in secret.

Sometimes they take their origin from another source: hence he says, from stranger spare your servant. But is the sin of another ever imputed to anyone? Ezech. 18: the soul that sins, it will die. Eccl. 13: He who touches pitch will be soiled by it. Or persuasion, or consent: Prov. 1: My son, if sinners tempt you, do not give in to them.

Or by deception as to the due time and place, then the sin becomes yours and is imputed to you: Rom. 1: Not only those who do these things are worthy of death, but also those who consent to those who do these things. And this is the case most especially in prelates who knowingly lie about the evil deeds of their subjects. And he says, spare your servant, because these sins appear to arise in us on account of divine anger, because occasions of sin of this sort are given to us. Or else, from strangers, proud men: Psal. 17: Alien sons have lied to me.

(i) *If my.* Here he presents the reason for his petition. And first on the part of David he asks for protection from evil. Second, he asks for perfection in the good, and they will be such that they please. Now, he asks for protection from evil.

And this is twofold: from future and from past evil. He says therefore, if mine had not ruled over me, that is, sins: Ps. 62: In the morning I killed all the sinners of the earth, that is, all the sins, which are called earth because of the many properties of earth. So that I would empty the city of all the workers of iniquity, that is, all evil works. Or they have ruled, that is, the proud. Or, aliens, that is, sinners, or else the demons who are said to rule when they drag one to consent: John 8: He who does a sin, is a servant of sin.

If therefore they will not rule, then I will be without stain, that is, I will preserve myself without stain of mortal sine, although not without venial sin: Job 15: How can a man be without stain? He speak of the past, "and I will be cleansed of the greatest offense": Isaiah 1: "If your sins be as scarlet, they will be turned white as snow." Job 11: If you take away from yourself the iniquity that is in your hand, and injustice will not remain in your tent, then you will be able to lift your face.

Or the greatest sin, which is pride, because it is the beginning of every sin: Eccl. 10: There is no greater sin than to apostatize from God: and this happens because of pride. Hence the sin that comes from pride is greater than one that comes from ignorance or weakness: for pride is the beginning and cause of all sin; and the man who lacks pride is truly without stain. Consequently he presents that which concerns perfection in the good.

And first, the good of the mouth; hence he says, may the words of my mouth be pleasing. As long as a man is in sins, his sayings do not please God: Eccl. 15: Praise in the mouth of a sinner is not beautiful: Psalm 49: God says to the sinner: why do you narrate my justices, and take up my testimony in your mouth; Again, he presents the perfection of the heart which requires the good pleasure of God; hence he says, and the meditation of my heart is always in your sight, that is, in the presence of the angels: or, you who see within also see my conscience. And I say this, because you, Lord, are my helper, in doing good, and my redeemer, in warding off evil: Isaiah 44: Turn back to me, because I have redeemed you.
