# Section 1 — Psalm 21

**My God, my God, look upon me: why have you forsaken me? far from safety are the words of my transgressions.**

**My God, I shall cry out by day, and you will not listen: and by night, and it will not be considered as foolish on my part.**

**You dwell, however, in the holy place, the praise of Israel.**

**Our fathers have hoped in you; they have hoped and you have freed them. They have cried out to you, and they were saved. They have hoped in you, and they were not confused.**

**But I am a worm and not a man: the reproach of men, and an outcast of the people. All who see me have ridiculed me: they have spoken with their lips, and have moved their heads:**

**"He hoped in the Lord, let him deliver him: let him save him, since he pleases him."**

**For you are the one who brought me forth from the womb, my hope from the breasts of my mother; from the womb I was thrown upon you.**

**From my mother's womb you are my God: do not forsake me.**

**For the trial is close, and there is no one who will help me.**

**Many calves have surrounded me: fat bulls have besieged me. They have opened their mouths against me, like a snatching and roaring lion.**

**Like water I am poured out, and all my bones are scattered. My heart has become like wax melting in the midst of my bowels.**

**My strength has dried up like an earthen vessel, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws: and you have brought me down to the dust of death.**

**For many dogs have surrounded me: the counsel of the wicked has besieged me. They have pierced my hands and my feet, they have numbered all of my bones.**

**They looked at and examined me: they divided my clothes among them, and upon my garments they cast lots.**

**But you, O Lord, do not withdraw your help from me: look towards my defense.**

**Rescue my soul, O Lord, from the spear, my only soul from the hand of the dog.**

**Save me from the lion's mouth, and my lowliness from the unicorn's horns.**

**I will proclaim your name to my brothers: in the midst of the church I will praise you.**

**You who fear the Lord, praise him, all offspring of Jabob, glorify him. Let all the offspring of Israel fear him.**

**For he has not spurned, nor despised the deprecation of the poor. Nor has he turned his face from me: and when I called upon him, he heard me.**

**My praise is before you in the great church: I will repay my vows in the sight of those who fear him.**

**The poor shall eat and be filled, and they will praise the Lord who seek him: their hearts will live forever.**

**All the ends of the earth will remember and be converted to the Lord. And all the families of the nations will adore in his sight.**

**For the Lord is king, and he will rule over the nations.**

**All earthly gluttons have eaten and have adored: they all fall down in his presence, those who go down to the earth.**

**And my soul shall live for him: and my offspring will serve him.**

**There will be announced to the Lord a generation to come; and the heavens will announce his justice to a people who will arise, whom the Lord will make.**

In the preceding psalms, we saw an earlier act of tribulation which David endured from his son and from Saul; however here, in the third group of ten, the discussion is about the persecution which was suffered by all people, who threw him aside into Saul's command.

This psalm therefore is divided into three parts. A tribulation is set forth in the first part. In the second, a prayer is poured out to God for deliverance. The action of graces is discussed in the third. The second begins at Psalm 24, at, *To you, O Lord, I have lifted up my soul,* and the third, at Psalm 28, at, *Bring to the Lord.*

Concerning the first he does two things. First he explains the tribulation, and second he shows how he is helped by God in this tribulation, at Psalm 22, *The Lord governs me.*

As was said above, just as in other prophecies, so too is it here a question of some present events at that time, insofar as they were a symbol of Christ and pertained to prophecy itself. And for that reason, matters are sometimes set forth which pertain to Christ, which surpass, as it were, the power of the narrative.

This very Psalm, among others, treats of the passion of Christ in a spiritual manner. And for this reason, this is its literal sense. Therefore, Jesus referred to this psalm particularly during his passion when he cried out "Eli, Eli, lema sabacthani", that is, "My God, my God" as begins the psalm. Thus, although this psalm speaks figuratively about David, nevertheless it is especially referred to Christ in a literal sense.

At the Synod of Toledo, a certain Theodorus Mopsuestenus, who was explaining this psalm literally with respect to David, was condemned, because of this approach, and for many other reasons; he ought to have explained it with respect to Christ. Let it be known this is treated of abundantly before the passion of Christ, of which this very Psalm is the first.

Other psalms touch briefly on the passion of Christ. The second of these is Psalm 34, *Judge, O Lord, those who are harming me.* The third is Psalm 54, *Hear, O Lord, my prayer, and despise not my supplication.* The fourth is Psalm 68, *Make me safe, O God, for the waters threaten my life.* And the fifth is Psalm 108, *O God, whom I praise, be not silent*

And this on account of the five wounds of Christ: or because of the five outpourings of his blood. And there is one manner of proceeding in all of these, because they begin in lamentation, and end in the salvation of the people, since from the passion was accomplished the salvation of all men.

The title of this psalm, in Jerome's version, is *For the victor according to the stag of the morning.* In our version, the title is *For the victor, usefully for the assumption, according to the deer of the morning.*

The discussion in this psalm is principally about Christ's passion. It touches, secondarily, on the resurrection, because it is given that the passion is to be understood in it, and that the passion is ordered to the resurrection, just as if I were to say that "This slave is freed", shows that he was a slave. Therefore, the psalm itself is of David, that is, of Christ. And it is for the assumption, that is, the resurrection, and this happened in the morning. Thus, *for the female servant,* that is, on behalf of human nature, or *for the morning servant,* that is Christ - *Psalm 107: I will arise at dawn.*

The title here refers to the time when David was a fugitive, and was hiding in desert places like a stag. Thus, he previously said, *And he set my feet as of a stag.* Therefore, this psalm itself is entitled for the very tribulation which symbolized the passion of Christ.

Nevertheless, this mode is referred better to Christ, so that by the stag is understood human nature in Christ, because the stag crosses a thicket of thorns without injury to its foot, just as Christ crossed through this present life without defilement.

Again, the stag leaps the best, just as Christ ascended from the pit of death to the glory of his resurrection. And for this reason, *stag* and *of the morning* are said, because he rose at that time.

The psalm is divided into three parts. A complaint is made in the first, the second sets forth the story of the passion, at, *But I am a worm,* and the third, a petition for freedom, at *But you, O Lord, do not withdraw.*

Concerning the first he does three things. First, he sets forth the complaint or question, second, the explanation of the complaint, at, *Far from safety,* and third, the reason for the complaint, at, *You dwell, however, in the holy place.*

This is the Septuagint translation. However, in the Greek and Hebrew translations *Look upon me* is not present. Instead they have, *My God, my God, why have you forsaken me,* because Christ said these words from the cross: *Look* was inserted (afterwards). Therefore, the petition is set forth when he says *My God, my God.* "God" is repeated twice for greater certainty - *Genesis 41: What you have seen twice pertains to the same thing, a strong sign. Look upon me,* that is, have mercy on me - *Psalm 25: Look upon me and have mercy, for I am alone* etc.

*Why have you forsaken me.* These words were said by Christ from the cross. Now, on account of these words, Arius took up an occasion for error, namely that in Christ's death, his divinity was separated from his humanity. Therefore because of this, according to Arius, the Lord complained, saying *Why have you forsaken me.*

But this is erroneous. For it should be known that someone is said to be forsaken by God when God does not go to him, just as he appears to approach when he protects him, and fulfils his petition - *Jeremiah 20: The Lord God is with me as a strong warrior: therefore those who persecute me will fall and be most low.* And because Christ was not freed from corporeal suffering at the time of his passion, for this reason it is said that you forsook (him) at that hour, that is, exposed him to the passion - *Romans 8: He did not spare his only son* etc.

Again, that petition, *Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me,* as it is said at *Matthew 26,* does not seem fulfilled, because it was according to the flesh - *Isaiah 54: I have forsaken you for a short time,* that is, I have exposed you to the passion; *and I will gather you together in great mercy,* namely in the resurrection. And so he says, *Why have you forsaken me,* that is, exposed me to the passion.

*Far from safety are the words of my transgressions.* Here is explained the complaint or question, first in general, second in particular, at *My God, I shall cry out.*

Therefore, he says, *You have forsaken me.* And this, because *far are the words of my transgressions from my safety,* from my true man, insofar as I have human nature - *Psalm 118: Far from sinners is salvation.*

These words, namely *You have forsaken, far from,* and *why,* do not seem to be of a just man or of justice, but seem to be, *words of my transgressions,* namely of human sin, that is, they show me not to be just, but a sinner. Therefore, Christ spoke these words in the person of a sinner, or of the Church.

And this is one of the rules posited above at the beginning of the psalter, that those things which pertain to its members, Christ says of himself, since the Church and Christ are as one mystical body; and for this reason, they are spoken of as one person, and Christ transforms himself into the Church, and the Church into Christ - *Romans 12: We, being many, are one body in Christ.*

Now, among the members of Christ, that is, the Church, there are transgressions or sins. However, in the head, that is, in Christ, there is no transgression, but only the likeness of transgression - *Romans 8: God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and of sin, has condemned sin (in the flesh); 2 Cor. 5: He who knew no sin, was made sin for us, so that we might accomplish God's justice in Christ.*

However, when his passion was approaching, Christ prayed, *Father, if it be possible,* etc. But these words which Christ prayed can be explained in two ways. First, so that Christ, by these words, revealed one bearing, as it were, the person of infirmities, which are in the Church: for the sake of the future so that some members would fear their own weaknesses when passion threatened them.

Second, this petition revealed in Christ one bearing the responsibility of weakened flesh which naturally fears and flees death. Since he seeks therefore to be freed, it becomes the statement either of the members in which transgression is found, or of the flesh of Christ in which there is a similitude to transgression or sin: and for this reason he says, *Words,* by which he seeks to be freed, which are, *of my transgressions,* that is of the faithful, for whose transgressions I suffer; or they are of the weakened flesh which has a similitude to transgression: far from bodily safety, since this cup, or passion, does not pass from me as I have requested; as if he were saying, "I do not attain the safety which I desire, if my petition was heard. Father, let this cup pass me by." And for this reason, Jerome's version has, *Far from my safety are the words of my moaning.*

Augustine explains this in a different way in his book *Concerning the Graces of the New Testament: These words, by which I seek to be freed from passion and by which I complain that I am abandoned to passion, are far from my safety which, in accordance with God, I ought to achieve - Matthew. 1: He will make his people safe from their sins.*

And he assigns the reason why he is forsaken: Salvation is two-fold, the one of the body, which is common to men and beasts - *Psalm 35: O Lord, you will save men and beasts.* The other is spiritual and eternal; and this is proper to Christ: and so he says, *My,* since the salvation of the New Testament was accomplished through Christ - *Isaiah 45: Israel was saved in the Lord in eternal safety.*

And these (two) differ because the first was sought in the Old Testament, while the second is sought in the New. Therefore, he is forsaken in his suffering, because it came in the New Testament. And these words which he says, *Far from my* spiritual *safety,* because they are on behalf of corporeal safety.

*Far from.* Christ speaks in the person of sinners, who are forsaken by God whenever on account of their sins: and so he says, *the words of my transgressions,* that is, they are of sinners, *far from safety,* that is spiritual (safety). For this is the reason why sinners are not saved, because they are sinners - *John 9: God does not hear sinners.* Or, according to Augustine, *from me,* is spoken as if by having forsaken me, you have made me far from my safety, that is corporeal (safety): and these words are of my transgressions.

These (words of complaint) are pursued in particular. We can understand "by day and by night" in two ways. First, literally, as temporal day and night. And so, to cry out is to cry out constantly. He thus says, *You will not listen,* as if he were saying, "Although I constantly cry out, I am not heard."

Jerome's version has, *And by night, and it is not silence to me,* as if to say, "I do not keep silent to pray by day and by night."

Second, that by "day" is understood "prosperity", and by "night", "adversity". According to Augustine, words which are said on behalf of the safety of the body, are made by day on behalf of prosperity, and by night, so that adversity may be taken away.

Therefore, Christ used to cry out by day, when he is in prosperity, and he is not heard because he prays that he not perish; and by night, that adversity be taken away, and it is not.

However, on the other hand, it is said concerning Christ that *He was heard* etc.

To this it may be said that prayer (or speech) is an act of reason: thus every prayer of Christ, proceeding from the judgment of reason, is heard. Otherwise, it concerns speech expressing the infirmity of passible nature and proper to the movement of its members, because he did not want it to be listened to - *John 12: Now my soul is troubled. And what shall I say? Father,* etc.

And the reason he is not heard in prosperity and adversity, he declares, *And it will not be considered as foolish on my part,* because this petition does not pertain to the salvation of the New Testament, which I myself intend, and which is eternal salvation, but pertains to the salvation of the Old Testament. Therefore, so that you may learn this wisdom, know that temporal salvation does not pertain to the New, but to the Old Testament. This is the wisdom which is foolishness among men - *1 Cor. 4: We are fools for Christ; 1 Cor. 1: Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?* etc.

Previously the question of Christ inquiring as to the cause of his passion was set forth. Here, however, he shows that a question of this kind is reasonable, and that it is reasonable that he was forsaken. And he first says this to be a wondrous deed on the part of God. Secondly, he shows this by earlier experience, at, *In you they have hoped.*

What he says here can be referred in two ways to the aforesaid, according to three interpretations. One is because he is far from temporal safety, and thus is fashioned this very division. Therefore, that is a wondrous deed on the part of God in two ways.

First, when God dwells in holiness, and does not defend them - *Judith 6: If the Lord is with us, why do all these evils take hold of us? Where are his wonderful deeds about which our fathers told us?* And for this reason, he says, *You dwell, however, in the holy place - Jeremiah 14: You, O Lord, are in us,* but he dwells especially in Christ.

Another reason is that whatever good we have, all of it is in the praise of God. And for this reason, if all is well with us, God is better praised by us. Thus follows, *The praise of Israel - Jerome 17: Heal me, O Lord, and I will be healed, make me safe, and I will be safe, for you are my praise.*

According to the second interpretation, *Why have you abandoned me,* for this reason, namely because *the words of my transgressions are far from my safety,* spiritually speaking: I cry out for temporal safety, but you who dwells in the holy place, (so that he says *The praise of Israel)* will not listen, because you do not hear when one does not cry out for spiritual safety.

Or, according to the third interpretation, so that Christ speaks in the person of the sinner, as if he were saying, For this reason are you far from my safety, because you do not dwell among sinners, but in the holy place.

At this point is determined the other reason which is taken from earlier custom and experience by which the holy fathers, invoking God, were liberated from their tribulations, as is clear from *Exodus 14* where they are freed from the Egyptians' persecution, from *Daniel 13* where Susanna is freed from the wicked sentence of the elders, and *Daniel 15* where Daniel is freed from the lion's mouth.

In the same manner, then, am I forsaken by you, and not liberated from my passion. Concerning this, he thus does two things. First, he makes mention of the evil of his corporeal affliction, and second, of the evil of his confusion.

With respect, therefore, to his liberation from the first evil, he did two things. First, he hoped in him; and so, he says *In you,* and not "In the world", *our fathers have hoped* - *Isaiah 26: You have hoped in the Lord for evermore, in the Lord God mighty forever* etc. *And you have freed them,* and this is the very fruit of hope, because you have freed them.

Second, they cried out; and so, he says, *They have cried out to you,* from great affection of heart: *And they were saved* - *Psalm 119: In my trouble I cried out to the Lord* etc.

With respect to the second evil, namely that of confusion, he says, *They have hoped in you, and were not confused.* But on the other hand, there is *Daniel 13: There is no confusion in those who trust in you; Romans 5: Hope does not confuse.*

It must be said that the fathers belonged to the Old Testament in which temporal things were given: and for this reason, that it demonstrate divine providence giving out even temporal things, and freeing them with temporal liberation.

But Christ promises and confers spiritual things; and, so that he might show temporal things ought to be despised and eternal things ought to be hoped for, he does not desire temporal liberation according to reason, although some in the New Testament are freed with temporal liberation, while others in the Old Testament are educated by spiritual afflictions, so that God might be shown to be the author of both Testaments.

At this point, he sets forth his passion. And first, he relates the confusion which he suffered. Second, he explains it, at, *All who see me.* Third, he assigns its cause, at, *For you are the one.*

The first part can be explained in two ways. First, so that he might put forth the likeness of confusion, and second, that he might relate the disgrace.

Therefore, he says "They, but not I, have been freed from confusion; but so worthlessly crushed underfoot as if I were a worm and not a man" - *Job 25: (How much less) man that is rottenness, and the son of man who is a worm; Lamentations 3: I am made a derision to all the people, their song all the day long.*

And he explains in what manner he is *the reproach of men, and an outcast of the people - Matt. 27: And they that passed by blasphemed him...Vah, you who would destroy the temple...And those who were crucified with him, reproached him...He saved others...* And *John 19: Weaving a crown of thorns* etc., and for this reason, *I have become the reproach of men,* in their words, as was said, *and an outcast of the people,* because they condemned him, and sought Barabbas, having rejected him - *Matt. 27; Lamentations 3: You have made me an outcast in the midst of the people.*

Second, that it might pertain to the dignity of Christ. For a worm is not generated from coition, but from the soil alone by the heat of the sun. For as we shall have had the most tender little worm of the wood, as is said at *2 Kings 23,* so too Christ was had from the virgin only by the workings of the Holy Spirit - *Psalm 84: The Lord will give goodness, and our earth shall yield its fruit.* For this reason, he says *But I am a worm and not a man,* namely as amounting to a worm, but also God.

Or it may be interpreted in another way according to Augustine. By "man" is understood the old man, namely Adam, who was as man, but not the son of man. By "worm" is understood Christ, who was as man, and the son of man, that is, of a virgin: for this reason, he says *I am a worm and not a man,* namely rejoicing in temporal matters, but son of man rejoicing in spiritual matters.

*An outcast of the people.* This is not changed. Subsequently, he sets down the derision. First, he shows how this is universal, and second, how manifold it is.

That it is universal he shows when he says, *All who see me have ridiculed me* - *Jeremiah 20: Everyone mocked me the whole day: because of the people and the rulers:* and this distribution, *All,* is understood for all the people, namely for (their) evil.

That the derision was manifold is shown because of their words; and so he says, *They have spoken with their lips* - *Matthew 27: And they that passed by blasphemed him; Isaiah 57: Upon whom have you jested? Upon whom have you opened your mouth wide, and put out your tongue?; Wisdom 2: If the just one is the son of God, he will defend him.* Again, having done (this), *They moved their heads* - *Matthew 27: Moving their heads,* namely on account of derision, *saying, 'He saved others...'* etc.

He discloses those words which they said for his confusion, because first they were taunting him with the hope which they had concerning God. Thus, he says, *He hoped in God, let him save him* - *Matthew 27: He trusts in God, he will deliver him if he wishes;* as if to say "If he trusted in the Lord, he would free him", because it was said immediately above, *Since our fathers hoped in you, you freed them.* But they are deceived since they do not understand salvation or temporal liberation.

Second, they taunted Christ (with the taunt) that he was not accepted by God. And so he says, *Let him save him, since he pleases him* - *Wisdom 3: He calls himself son of God.*

Consequently, the cause of his confusion is set forth, concerning which he does two things. First, he determines the cause, and second, he breaks out in prayer at, *Do not forsake me.*

The cause of mockery is usually foolishness. And so, temporal men consider the good to be foolish since the good do not trust in the world - *Psalm 13: You confuse the counsel of the impious since the Lord is (the good man's) hope.*

With respect to this cause, he does two things. First, he determines the divine benefit moving one to hope, and second, the hope itself, at, *My hope;* it is as if he were saying, "They mock me since my hope is in you." And for this reason he says, *For you are the one who brought me forth from my mother's womb.*

At this point, he first determines what belongs to the head. Whatever things are naturally born from a mother's womb, are produced by the divine power, which is itself the cause of everything - *Galatians 1: He who removed me from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace.* But he speaks separately of Christ taken from his mother's womb because he was conceived miraculously, and born without seed to a mother kept undefiled - this is a benefit (from God), and from this, hope follows. Concerning this, he determines three things. First, the hope itself, second, its perfection, and third, its nature.

Therefore, he says, *My hope from the breasts of my mother,* that is "You are my hope through which I am a man and have suckled at the breasts of my mother", because when the Word was with God, it was not appropriate to hope in him - *Psalm 78: My hope from my youth.*

But on the other hand, Christ, from the beginning of his conception, had the use of free choice. Therefore, from that point, he hoped.

I respond by saying that breasts, that is, the milk that was prepared for the Word at that time, was that by which he was conceived. And so, "breasts" are referred to the conception itself.

*From the womb I was thrown upon you.* On the contrary. If, after having come forth from the womb, he was thrown upon God, therefore before he came forth from the womb, he was not thrown upon God.

It must be said, in response, that he is thrown upon another, not as such, but that he depends upon him - *1 Peter 5: Casting all your care upon him.* And so, *From the womb I was thrown upon you,* because I depend solely upon you. And in this way, the perfection of hope is described.

At this point, he sets down a reason for hope; as if he were saying, "In you I have hoped, because I have always cherished you as God" - *Psalm 27: In God has my heart hoped, and I have been helped.* And for this reason he says, *You are my God from my mother's womb,* that is by whom I became a man, since before this I was not a man, but the son of God.

But if this passage is interpreted concerning the members of Christ, projection or extraction is from one to another according to the flesh, but Christ always tended to God: however, it speaks of the members which, according to the flesh, are always in the carnal womb, namely in worldly concupiscence; but by God, they are extracted from any sort of concupiscence, and are thrown upon him, so that they hope in and seek after nothing except God.

Consequently he concludes his prayer when he says *Do not forsake me,* namely by protecting, or in my members so far as concerns spiritual matters; as if he were saying, *Forsake me,* by exposing me to corporeal suffering. *Do not depart from me,* by supporting me with spiritual help.

This, according to Jerome, is the first verse of the following (material): and for this reason it can be fittingly read, as was said, with what went before: and even with the following.

As Jerome says, it is more fittingly read with the following (material): for the psalm interpreting the passion from the person of Christ, first sends forth a prayer, after which follows the order of the passion, at *Many calves have surrounded me* etc. Concerning the first he does two things. First he relates the prayer, and second, shows the necessity of praying at, *For the trial is close.*

Therefore he says, *You are my God from my mother's womb,* and for that reason I pray, *do not forsake me,* for the trial is very near. These words are to be understood as Christ speaks in the person of his members, so that he would not forsake them in tribulations - *1 Cor. 10: And God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able; Psalm 70: Do not forsake me, for my enemies have spoken against me, and they that watched my soul, have taken counsel together.*

However, he does not say this for himself. The necessity is twofold; the trial which threatens, and the help which falls short; thus, he says *The trial is close,* namely, in time - *Matthew 26: Behold, the hour is at hand, and the son of man shall be betrayed* etc.

However, it is objected that since these are Christ's words when he was actually on the cross, in what sense is the trial close? We can say that David changes times.

Augustine solves this objection in a different way. Sometimes a trial is close, and at other times is it remote. The feeling of pain is in the soul: the body is close to the soul, exterior goods are remote. Therefore, when there is affliction in exterior things, trial is not close. But when there is affliction in the body proper, then it is near and close: and it is impossible for a man who does not feel. Christ however, was afflicted in his very body - *Psalm 114: I met with trial and pain.* Again help falls short, *For there is no one who will help me.* And for this reason it was fitting that prayer be pursued - *Isaiah 63: I looked about, and there was no one to help; I sought, and there was none to give aid:* since even the apostles fled, having abandoned him.

Previously, the Psalmist, in the person of Christ, shows his complaint or quarrel to be reasonable, both on the part of God and of earlier custom or experience. However, here he pursues the order of the passion as to the affliction of the body. And he first determines the persecutors, second, the effect of the persecution, at, *Like water,* and third, the mode of persecution, at *Dogs have surrounded me.*

Thus, first are introduced his persecutors attacking his work. Some are young, such as the common people and servants; and with regard to this he states, *Many calves have surrounded me* - *Ecclesiastes 1: The number of fools is infinite. They have surrounded me,* because they attack from all sides - *Psalm 117: Like bees they have surrounded me.*

Others are old. Thus, he says, *Fat bulls have besieged me* - *Ecclesiasticus 6: Do not extol yourself in your thought, like a bull through its bulk and courage, nor is it pressed down by its yoke; it engenders much and is proud.*

He says this because the bull is a melancholic animal, on account of which it retains its anger for a long time. And just as the young possess insolence on account of their numbers, so too do the old, on account of their wealth. And for this reason he says *Fat...* - *Job 15: He is armed with a fat neck. They have besieged me*; *Job 19: they have besieged my tabernacle round about.*

Consequently, he sets forth his persecutors assailing him in words. Thus he says, *They have opened their mouths against me.* And indeed, by tempting him several times - *Matthew 22: Why do you tempt me, you hypocrites?* By accusing, by longing after and awaiting his death, stating, "Crucify him" - *Lamentations 2: My enemies have opened their mouths against me.*

Consequently he employs a similitude, *like a snatching and roaring lion,* to which they are likened on account of their cruelty - *Jeremiah 12: My inheritance has become to me as a lion in the woods; it has gone against my voice;* for this is characterisitic of a lion so that having caught its prey, it roars - *Amos 3: Will the lion's cub give voice from its den, if it has taken nothing?* And he says, *Snatching,* by lying in ambush, and *Roaring,* clearly in awaiting death - *Ezechiel 11: Like a lion roaring and snatching prey they devoured my soul.*

Consequently, he determines the effect of his persecution. He first sets forth this effect, and second, explains it, at, *Are scattered.*

And so, he says, *They pursue and harm me,* because they have completely prevailed with respect to bodily safety. For this reason he says, *Like water I am poured out.* If oil were poured out, some would remain in the vessel, and if wine were poured out, at least some odour would remain in the vessel. But if water were poured out, nothing would remain. It is as if he were saying, I am completely poured out according to their opinion - *2 Kings: We are lost like water which is not returned above ground.* Water is easily poured out and flung away: so therefore I am poured out.

Also, the Jews not only tried to annihilate him from the face of the earth, they also wanted to destroy his renown.

Or, Christ is compared to water, because water cleanses, just as Christ's passion cleanses from every sin and filth - *Apoc. 1: He loved us and cleansed us from our sins in his own blood.*

Again, water moistens and makes things to bear fruit, just like Christ's passion - *Ecclesiasticus 24: He said, I water my garden* etc. And it brings forth the fruit of eternal life - *Ecclesiasticus 24: My flowers,* that is of my passion, *are the fruits of honour and riches.*

Again, water makes life uncertain, just as Christ's passion decreed the downfall of the Jews - *1 Cor. 1: But we preached Christ crucified, a scandal to the Jews, and foolishness to the gentiles; but to them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.*

Consequently he explains this effect; and thus he says, *Are scattered* etc., as if he were saying, "Whatever strength was seen in me, is now destroyed: whatever beauty, has withered away." And thus he says, *Scattered.*

There is a two-fold strength is man. One is the strength of the body, and this consists in the bones and tendons. With respect to this, he says, *All my bones are scattered,* as if he were saying "Every one of my corporeal powers has failed"; nevertheless, it is said spiritually of Christ: for the apostles, who were the bones of Christ, have become dispersed - *Zach. 13: I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.*

The other is a strength of the soul which consists in the heart. And so he says, *My heart has become like melting wax.*

Augustine asks how true this is of Christ the head, because this seems to come about from an excess of fear, which is not fittingly said of Christ, since even if natural fear arose in him, nevertheless it was not so much that it melted (or softened) his heart. It is thus not understood of Christ as such, but with respect to his members, which indeed are the body of Christ, and which he especially loves - *Phil. 1:...for that I have you in my heart.* And it follows, *God is my witness, how I long after you all to be in the bowels of Jesus Christ.*

These became apostles who became bones to uphold the infirm within the Church, just like the bones uphold the flesh - *Rom. 15: We, the stronger, ought to bear the weakness of the infirm.*

And their hearts became like melting wax. First, by an evil melting (or softening) through fear, like in the flight of the disciples - *Matthew 26: Then leaving him, they all fled.* And in Peter's denial - *Luke 22: But he denied him saying, "Man, I do not know what you are talking about."*

Second, by a good melting (or softening), like in the conversion of the disciples, as is clear with Peter and Andrew. Or it ought to be said that melting (softening) is also of love - *Song of Songs 5: My soul has melted (softened).* Before a thing melts (softens), it is hard and bound in itself; if it melts (softens), it pours out, and tends from itself into another.

Fear also hardens sometimes, namely when it is not great. It is also so with love, because when love supervenes, then it shows in another what before was in itself. And concerning this melting (softening), it can even be explained concerning Christ, insofar as he is head. For this melting (softening) is both from the Holy Spirit, and in the midst of his bowels, that is his desire.

Or, by the heart of Christ is understood Holy Scripture, which manifests the heart of Christ. However, this was closed before the passion, because it was obscure; but is opened after the passion, because they consider it now understanding, and they teach how the prophets are to be explained.

At this point, the psalmist shows that whatever beauty was in Christ disappeared. Before his passion, flourishing was seen in Christ in three ways; the performing of miracles, eloquence of teaching, and the fame and glory of the people.

Concerning the first, there is *John 7: A great multitude followed him, because they saw* etc. And this power dried up during his passion in their opinion. And so, they cried out, *He saved others* etc. *Has dried up,* that is, has become worthless, *like* etc. Or, *an earthen vessel,* when it becomes dry, is hardened, just as during the passion, Christ's strength became hardened so as to sustain him - *Ecclesiasticus 27: The furnace tests the potter's vessels, and the trial of tribulation, just men.*

Concerning the second, there is *Matthew 7: He was teaching them as one having power;* but in the passion, *my tongue cleaves to my jaws,* because of a disinclination to talk - *Ezechiel 3: I will make your tongue cleave to the roof of your mouth, and you shall be mute.* And this was done in the passion, because he did not respond to Herod - *Luke 23: Herod questioned him in many words.* But he answered him nothing.

Concerning the third, there is *Matthew 21: A very great multitude spread their garments in the way: and others cut boughs from trees* etc. *Then it was fulfilled what David had prophesied concerning the Christ saying, Lord, make me safe, O Lord, may you prosper well; blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, the Lord God has shone upon us.* But in his passion, he withered; and so he says, *And you have brought me down to the dust of death,* that is, you have made me to suffer a vile death - *Wisdom 2: Let us condemn him to a most shameful death.*

Or, if it is referred to his members. *You have brought me down to the dust of death,* that is, my members which are reduced to ashes, not however of Christ.

Or, *You have brought me down to the dust of death,* that is, you have given me over to the power of the Jews, who are like dust etc.

At this point, the mode of the passion is set forth. He first determines those things which were done before the crucifixion, second, those which were done during the crucifixion itself, and third, those which were done after the crucifixion.

Before the crucifixion, two things were done. First he was captured; with respect to this he says, *Many dogs have surrounded me - Phil. 3: See the dogs, see the evil doers; Isaiah 56: Most impudent dogs, they never had enough.*

Second, how he was derided. And so he says, *the counsel of the wicked has besieged me.*

Following upon this, he determines those things which were done at the crucifixion. And first, with respect to attachment, *They have pierced my hands and my feet,* affixing them to the wood with large nails - *Zac. 13. What are these wounds in the middle of your hands?*

Again, with respect to distention, he says, *They have numbered all of my bones,* that is, they have been made countable.

At this point are determined those things which were done after the passion. And so he says, *They* etc., coming to the spectacle so they might deride him - *Luke 23: The soldiers who were deriding him, filled a sponge with sour wine, saying, If you are the king of Israel, save yourself* etc.

*And they examined me,* namely, what would become of me, *They divided my clothes among them,* which were several and divisible: *And upon my garment,* namely seamless, *they cast lots;* and they did this either because of desire, or as a sort of mockery.

By these divided clothes are signified the sacraments of the Church; but by garment, which is not divided, is signified the unity of the Church, which everyone believes it to have; but it does not have it unless it be one, since there is a single unity of the Church - *Song of Songs 6: One is my dove, my perfect one.*

Having recounted the passion, he proceeds at this point to his prayer, concerning which he does two things. He asks, first, for divine help, and second, for the fruit of help provided, at *I will proclaim your name.*

Concerning the first, he does two things. He asks, first, for divine help in general, and second, for himself in particular, at *Rescue from the spear.*

Concerning the first he does two things. He asks, first, for a hastening of help, and second, for the necessity of help.

Therefore, concerning the first, he says, *So they have done. They have pierced my hands and my feet* etc., but *You, O Lord, do not withdraw your help from me,* that is, do not delay in giving me God's help in Christ the man; it is as if he were saying, It was done, because he was freed from death by the glory of his resurrection, which was not withdrawn, since he rose from the dead after three days. And Christ did this, rising from the grave - *1 Cor. 15: Christ rising from the dead, the first of those who sleep; Psalm 56: I will arise at dawn.*

*Look towards my defense;* as if he were saying, For this, your help is necessary to me, namely, *For my defense.*

*Protect me under the shadow of your wings* etc. Defend me, namely, against those who persecute me unto death, and against demons so that they might not detain me in limbo. And so, therefore, he asked so that his body would not be reduced to ashes, and that his soul would not be detained in hell - *Acts 2:...having loosed the sorrows of hell, as it was impossible that he should be held by it; Psalm 37: Do not forsake me* etc.

At this point, he explains in particular from what he asks to be defended, first against death, and second against the trial of death, at, *From the hand of the dog.*

Therefore, he says, *Look towards my defense,* and God, *Save my soul,* which they themselves seek, *from the spear,* that is, from the sword which disturbed angrily demands.

But on the other hand, Christ was not slain by a sword, but by a lance, and moreover, by a lance inflicted after death.

However, it must be said that the sword divides by its sharpness - *Heb. 4:...sharper than any two-edged sword, and reaching unto the division...:* and thus since death divides the soul from the body, father from son, and on the other hand, brother from brother, a sword is said - *Zac. 13: O spear,* that is death, *awake against my shepherd:* and from this he is rescued in the resurrection.

Or, *spear* is the tongue of one's opponents - *Psalm 56:...their tongue a sharp sword.*

Or, Christ speaks here on behalf of his members, of which many were killed by the sword - *Acts 12: But he killed Jacob the brother of John by the sword.*

*And from the hand of the dog.* He prays here against trials, and he describes them in a three fold way as unreasonable. He does this under the likeness of the dog, which barks immediately in accordance with its anger before it perceives against whom it ought to bark.

And so, before the Jews know why they bark, they cry out against Christ - *Phil. 3: See the dogs, see the evil doers:* and above, *Many dogs have surrounded me.* This pertains most especially to the Jews who, barking against Christ cried out, *Crucify, crucify him.*

At this point, he describes cruel men under the similitude of the lion, which is a cruel animal. And this is referred to Pilate who exercises the power of a lion, that is, of an emperor, whom the Apostle calls a lion - *2 Tim. 4: I was freed from the mouth of the lion.*

Or, it is referred to the devil - *1 Peter: Like a roaring lion he goes about, seeking someone to devour.*

*And my lowliness from the unicorn's horns.* Here, he describes arrogant men, and is referred to the High Priest and Scribes, who are compared to the unicorn, designated as arrogant. And it happens that it has one horn on its head, and is so arrogant that in no way does it suffer subjection, but when captured immediately dies - *Job 39: The rhinoceros,* that is the unicorn, *will never desire to serve you, but will die* etc.

And by this is signified the rulers of the Jews who especially boast in their knowledge of God. And whoever especially raises himself up, is similar to a Pharisee - *Luke 18: I am not as other men are; Psalm 74: Lift not your horn up high.*

Consequently, he shows the fruit of divine help. And he shows this first with respect to Christ himself, and second, with respect to others, at, *The poor shall eat.*

Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he determines a two-fold fruit, namely, of proclamation and of praise, and second, he explains both, at, *You who fear.*

Concerning the first, he determine the two fold fruit of Christ's liberation. The first fruit becomes a proclamation through the whole world.

Therefore he says, *Save me from the lion's mouth* etc. because he was saved and liberated from its jaws.

*I will proclaim your name to my brothers,* that is, to the apostles. And this was done after the resurrection. The apostles are brothers to Christ both through assumed nature and by the grace of the calling to apostleship - *Romans 8: (For those whom) he has foreknown he has also predestined to become conformed to the image of his Son: those whom he has predestined, them he has also called.*

But he did not set forth the name of God before the passion, although he himself said at *John 22: Father I have made your name known to men* etc.

It must be said thus: but more fully after his passion and resurrection. First, he sets it forth to the disciples by his own mouth, when he opened their minds to them so that they might understand the Scriptures - *Luke 24.*

Second, by giving them the Holy Spirit - *John 16: But when he, the Spirit of truth, has come, he will teach you every truth.* And *John 14: I will reveal to him my very self; Luke 21: Then they will see the Son of Man coming with great power and majesty.* For at that time, they will know the Father in the Son - *John 14: On that day, you will know that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me, and that I am in you.* And this is suitable only to the Son himself as he himself says at *Matthew 10: No one knows the Father except the Son.*

The second fruit of Christ's liberation was divine praise. And so he says, *In the midst of the Church I will praise you* - *Isaiah 44: His praise from the ends of the earth.*

But his says, *In the midst of the Church,* which Augustine explains as follows. We say that something is in the middle or in our midst, which is in the open. In the Old Testament, God was praised in secret, that is, in secret rites. But in the New Testament, he is praised in public, because (he exists now) in unveiled truth - *2 Cor. 3: But we, contemplating the glory of God revealed to our face, through the removal of our veils.*

Sometimes we say something is in the middle which is innermost. Such in the Church are the perfected men who especially praise God in their hearts. *In the midst of the Church I will praise you,* that is, in your doctors and perfected men.

Both are accomplished in order, the latter at *(My praise is) before you.*

In the former, he sets down the entire proclamation of the New Testament, in what way the name of the Lord is set forth. He first shows that to which men are led in the New Testament, and second, what is set forth to them, at, *For he has not spurned.*

In the New Testament, men are led to three things, namely to the confession of the mouth, to seek the glory of God, and to fear God. With respect to the first he says, *You who fear the Lord, praise him.*

Now, there is a two-fold fear. The first is filial, where one fears to offend God and to be separated from him; he exhibits reverence to Him, and this is from love. The other, however, is a servile fear, where one fears only the penalty; and this is not from love - *John 4: Love banishes fear.*

The Old Law was of fear; but the New Law is a law of love. Therefore, *You who fear the Lord,* that is, you who have fulfilled the law out of fear, *Praise him,* since no one praises something which he does not value highly; it is as if he were saying "We acknowledge him out of love" - *Psalm 116: Praise the Lord* etc.

With respect to the second, he says, *All offspring of Jacob, glorify him* - *1 Cor. 10: Whether you are eating, drinking or doing something else, do everything for the glory of God.* And he says *All offspring of Jacob* etc. because to the sons of Jacob, that is, to the Jews, the law of the Old Testament was given, in which the glory of God is promised. And he says, *All,* so as to include the sons of the promise who are counted among their offspring, as is said at *Galatians 3,* namely the nations.

With respect to the third, he says, *Let all the offspring of Israel fear him,* with a fear of reverence which is with delight - *Deut. 10: And now, what does the Lord, your God, desire from you except that you fear him, and walk in his ways?* Israel is the same as Jacob.

At this point is shown what is announced to them, namely the power of Christ, as it speaks in the person of Christ praying.

Sometimes, one does not want to regard someone's prayers, namely, when he does not want to see the very one on behalf of whom he is petitioned; or when he does not want to see the one asking. Sometimes, even if he wants to see the one asking, he does not want to listen to his petition. With respect to the first, he excludes this when he says, *He has not spurned,* as it were, by being neglectful: *Nor despised the deprecation of the poor,* that is, his humility which does not have hope in temporal things, but in Christ.

Second, he shows, *Nor has he turned his face from me,* as it were, by not accepting me - *Psalm 68: Do not avert your face from your child* etc.

Third, when he says, *And when I called upon him, he heard me,* because the judge allows what I have asked on behalf of myself and mine - *John 16: Whatever you petition the Father in my name, he will give to you; John 2: I cried out, and you listened to my voice.*

Note that before the passion he said that three things were to be suffered by him, namely he would be cast aside, *I am a worm* etc., forsaken, *Why have you forsaken me,* and would not be listened to, *I will cry out by day and you do not listen:* and why he was then speaking, *words of transgressions,* that is, belonging to the infirmities of the flesh according to which temporal things are more sought. Now, however, because through the resurrection, for this kind (of people), he has prompted human nature so that it might seek spiritual things, he speaks the contrary.

Because he said above, *I am a worm* etc., here he says, *He has not spurned me* etc. Above he said, *You have forsaken me,* here he says, *Nor has he turned his face from me.* Above, he said, *I will cry out by day,* here he says, *When I called upon him, he heard me.*

Previously, the Psalmist, in the person of Christ, promised that he was to speak of two things, namely the setting forth of the divine name, and the praise of God. He has already spoken concerning the first; at this point, he takes up the second, namely divine praise.

Concerning this he does two things. First, he shows of what sort is the praise of God, and second, how the work adds to praise, at, *My vows* etc.

And so, with respect to the first, he says *My praise is before you.* And this can be understood in a two-fold way. In the first way, as so: My praise by which I am praised, is before you, not among men from whom I do not have praise, but from you - *2 Cor. 10: It is not the one who commends himself that is acceptable, but the one whom God commends.*

In the second way, as so: *My praise,* by which, namely, I praise you, is *before you,* and not in the eyes of men - *Ecclesiasticus 47: Concerning all things, he praised God in his heart, and delighted the Lord,* and this, *in the great church,* brought together through me and my name. *Great,* in expansion - *Isaiah 54: Expand the space of your tents, and extend the skins of your tabernacles. Great,* in power - *Matthew 16: Upon this rock I will build my church* etc., *and whatever you loosen* etc. *Great,* in dignity - *Apoc. 11: The kings of the earth will affirm his glory and honour on that day.*

At this point, he shows how work adds to praise. Christ's vow was made so that he might offer himself for the salvation of the faithful: he vowed himself to this as a man - *Psalm 39: I have desired, my God, that I might do you will.* For indeed the will of God is our sanctification - *John 6: I have come down from heaven not so that I might do my will, but the will of him who sent me.*

Christ repays these vows by giving himself to the passion, and furthermore when he gave his body for the food of the faithful. And so he says, *Vows,* that is, sacrifices: *I will repay,* on the altar of the cross and the sacrifice of the faithful; and this I will do, *in the sight of those who fear him* - *Ecclesiasticus 5: He who fears the Lord, honours his parents.*

Consequently, at this point he sets down the effect of the passion for others. He first sets forth diverse effects of the passion and second, shows them to pertain to the future, at *There will be announced.*

Concerning the first he does two things. First, he sets forth the effects pertaining to the Apostles, and second, he determines the sort of effects dispensed to others through the Apostles.

To the Apostles pertain the ministry of the Lord's sacraments, which is designated when he says, *The poor shall eat,* that is, the humble and despised things of the world - *Matthew 3: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.* These very ones will eat the sacrifice, that is, the sacrament of the Lord's body and blood, both sacramentally and spiritually.

And from this follows a three-fold effect; spiritual, namely sufficiency, praise, and life. With respect to the first he says, *And they will be satisfied,* because he will quiet their desire in an abundance of graces, which are acquired through this sacrament - *Psalm 62: My soul is filled as with grease and fat.*

With respect to the second, he says, *And they will praise the Lord who seek him.* This is not extraordinary, because praise follows upon joy - *Isaiah 51: They shall come into Zion praising and everlasting joy upon their heads.* Sufficiency of desire causes delight - *Isaiah 55: Your soul will be delighted in thickness,* that is, in spiritual fatness - *Psalm 41: The noise of those feasting, with the sound of exaltation and acknowledgement.* But not just anyone praises God, but *Those who seek him,* that is, those who seek nothing other than Christ, or God - *Isaiah 35: Seek the Lord while he may be found; call on him while he is near.*

With respect to the third, he says, *Their hearts will live forever* - *John 6: He who eats of this bread, will live forever.* And thus he says, *He will live,* as if he were saying, "Although bodies pass away by imitating the passion of the Lord, nevertheless they will live in heart - *Psalm 68: Seek the Lord, and your soul will live.*

At this point, he sets down the effects dispensed to others, first, commonly to all, second, with respect to carnal people, at, *All have eaten,* and third, with respect to spiritual people, at, *And my soul.*

There is a three-fold effect. First, there is divine knowledge at which the nations arrive through the Apostles, second, there is the effect to the conversion to Christ, and the third effect is manifested through the perfection of the work.

With respect to the first, he says, *They will remember.* In men, there is naturally inserted a certain knowledge of God. However, they forget God through sin - *Deut. 32: You have forgotten the Lord, your creator.* The nations had some knowledge of God, but it had been forgotten because of sin; however, through the Apostles, they were led back to the remembrance of this natural knowledge - *Jeremiah (?) 31: Remember only the Lord.*

With respect to the second, he says, *And they will be returned to the Lord,* namely through love. And this was done not only for Israel, but for *All the ends of the earth* - *Isaiah 21: If you will inquire, inquire; turn back and come* -

and these two effects also pertain to the sacrament of the altar, since it is a kind of memorial of the Lord's passion, as is said at *1 Cor. 11.*

And so he says *They will remember,* since the conversion of the soul to God is an effect of the sacrament of the altar - *Psalm 22: He leads me beside still waters.* Honouring him not in ceremonies, but *In his presence,* namely in spiritual worship - *John 4: True worshippers will adore the Father in spirit and in truth. And all the families of the nations - Wisdom 2: The men will adore him concerning this place, all the islands of the nations;* as it were, that it may be understood that the nations worshipped the God of Israel: and just as the proselytes going to the Jews to live with him, they returned to his place.

The spiritual power of the whole world is of Christ - *Daniel 7: And he gave power to him, and the kingdom* etc. And not only of the Jews, according to that, *Upon David alone;* but he himself will rule the nations - *Psalm 2: Ask of me, and I will give you the nations as your inheritance.*

At this point, he determines the effect which followed with respect to carnal people. And he sets down two things. First, he determines their good, and second, their defect, at, *They,* carnal people, *fall down in his presence:* and these receive a two-fold good, namely participation in sacred things, and veneration of God in worship.

With respect to the first, he says, *They have eaten,* although unworthy, because they are carnal - *1 Cor. 15: Flesh and blood will not possess the kingdom of God.* Concerning the good he said above that they will be satisfied and will praise the Lord, and they will live, because they reverence the sacrament through the faith which they have. But these very people because they are the fat of the earth, that is, fixed upon earthly things, and not raised up to spiritual ones - *They fall down in his presence,* namely God's - *Jerome 21:*

These are designated by fat cows, *Amos 4; Deut 32: He was fattened and loved, and has become resistive:* for, *he who eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks the judgment to himself,* as is said at *1 Cor. 11.*

And he well says, *All those who go down,* that is, those who are submerged in earthly matters by their emotions, because even if these seem to stand in the presence of men, nevertheless they fall in the presence of God - *Isaiah 8: Many of these they offend, and they fall.*

Or, *They fall in his presence,* that is, they are submitted to him, even his enemies, *All those who go down to the earth,* that is, into the corruption of sin - *Philippians 2: At the name of Jesus, every knee shall bend.*

At this point he determines the effect with respect to spiritual persons. The soul of Christ is in those upon whom the Holy Spirit rests, namely spiritual people, which is related to God in a two-fold way.

First, with respect to the heart, because they live in this, namely in God, or Christ - *Gal. 2: I live* etc.; *2 Cor. 5: Those who are living now do not live for themselves, but for the one who died for them.*

Second, with respect to work, *and my offspring.* Good offspring are the sons of the kingdom; it is as if he were saying, "Sons which I myself have brought forth, serve God alone; since every work which they have done, they refer to his glory."

At this point, he explains when this will happen, because it is not at that time, but at a future date. And he sets down three things. First, he makes a proclamation of faith, second, by whom it ought to be proclaimed, and third, to whom it will be proclaimed.

With respect to the first, he says *There will be announced to the Lord a generation to come.* And this can be explained in a two-fold way.

In one way with Jerome; it is as if he were saying, *A generation to come will be announced,* that is, it will be evangelized, so that they might be turned towards the Lord. Also, it will be announced or rather passively announced, as if he were saying "Through the proclamation of the Apostles, that generation will be brought to the Lord" - *Matt. 11: The poor will be evangelized.*

Or thus: The generation's good will be announced by the angels to God himself, not that he is unknowing or wanting, but so that order is observed, as Dionysius says, and as is said in *Tobit 12: I am Raphael, one of the seven angels who stand before the Lord. And the heavens will announce,* that is, the apostolic heavens - *Phil. 3: Our conversation is in heaven - his justice,* not human, but God's, which the Jews repel - *Romans 10: Ignorant of the justice of God, and seeking to establish their own* etc.

It will be announced to them, as to a *People who are born,* by a spiritual generation - *John 3: Unless a man be born again* etc. However, this people is not born again by human workings, but by divine - *John 1: Not from blood, nor from the will of the flesh, nor from the will of man, but from God they were born.* And for this reason, he says, *Whom the Lord will make* - *Psalm 99: The Lord made us* etc.
