# Section 1 — Psalm 28

**On the completion of the tabernacle. Bring to the Lord, you sons of God,**

**Bring to the Lord, offspring of rams.**

**Bring to the Lord glory and honour; bring to the Lord glory to his name; adore the Lord in his holy court.**

**The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; the God of majesty has thundered; the Lord upon many waters. The voice of the Lord in power; the voice of the Lord in magnificence.**

**The voice of the Lord breaking the cedars; and the Lord will break the cedars of Lebanon.**

**And he will crush them, as a calf of Lebanon: and as the beloved son of unicorns.**

**The voice of the Lord dividing the flame of fire; the voice of the Lord shaking the desert; and the Lord will disturb the desert of Kadesh. The voice of the Lord preparing the stags, and he will lay bare the thick woods: and in his temple all will speak of his glory.**

**The Lord makes the flood to dwell; and the Lord will sit as King forever. The Lord will give strength to his people: the Lord will bless his people with peace.**

In other psalms, the psalmist has recounted the trust that he has from God; here, however, like a man set free, he gives thanks: and first, psalms suitable for thanksgiving are set forth: second, he recounts outstanding favours, as he says, (Psalm 30) *In you, O Lord, have I hoped.*

About the first issue, he makes two points. First, he asks others to give thanks; second, he himself gives thanks, as he says (Psalm 29) *I shall exalt you.*

The title: a psalm of David upon the completion of the tabernacle. It is written in the history of *1 Kings 4* where the children of Israel in the time of Eli fought against the Philistines, and the Ark of God was captured and was in that land for six months. Finally, because of a plague, they sent it back to Gilboa (?). And upon the death of Saul, David took it and brought it to Jerusalem and made a tabernacle for it and played before it, as we have it in *2 Kings 6.* And it appears that this psalm was composed then.

Mystically, by tabernacle the holy Church is designated. *Apocalypse 21: Behold the tabernacle of God is with men.*

This tabernacle, that is, the Church, was torn from the hands of the Philistines, that is, from demons. And what is said in this psalm pertains to the gifts of the Holy Ghost, through which this tabernacle is perfected.

It is divided therefore into two parts. In the first, he invites others to make an offering to God by way of thanksgiving; in the second, he recounts favours, as he says *The voice of the Lord is upon the waters.*

About the first, he makes three points. First, he shows to whom the offering is made; second, who may offer it; third, what they may offer.

He says, therefore, *Bring.* But to whom? *To the Lord,* alone, not to another. Exodus 22. What ought to be offered to God alone is told in the last chapter of *1 Paralipomenon, All things are yours and what we have received from your hands have we given to you.*

He shows who should have been offering: *the sons of God. Ecclesiasticus 34: The Most High esteems not the gifts of the wicked.* In *Genesis 4, God first had regard for Abel and for his offerings afterwards;* for man has to please God first and then make him an offering; and, therefore, he says *Sons of God* through faith. *John 1: As many as received him, he gave them the power to become Sons of God, those who believe in his name.*

Also, through charity. *1 John 3: See what love God has given to us, that we might be named and might be Sons of God.* Through good works. *Romans 8: Those who are moved by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.*

*Bring.* Here he shows what ought to be offered: and first he sets forth bodily sacrifice; secondly, spiritual, as he says, *Bring to the Lord glory.*

An oblation was made from three sorts of animals: that is from cattle, goats and sheep: and above the other animals, the lamb was by far the accustomed sacrifice:

whence it is said in *Exodus 29* that every morning and every evening one lamb was sacrificed: for by a lamb was Christ most assuredly and clearly prefigured. *John 1: Behold the Lamb of God.* And therefore he says *Bring to the Lord offspring of rams,* that is, lambs.

Mystically, rams are leaders of the flock, that is, apostles. *Psalm 46: The leaders of the people are gathered together.* Their sons are the faithful. *1 Corinthians 4: In Christ Jesus, through the Gospel, have I begotten you. Bring,* therefore, your very selves to God, you who are offspring of rams.

*Bring.* Next he proposes a spiritual sacrifice: and first he proposes it and secondly he manifests it, as he says, *Bring to the Lord glory to his name.*

It is to be noted that the Lord wanted these things to be offered to him, not for his own sake, for he himself has said (Psalm 49), *Shall I eat the flesh of bulls, or shall I drink the blood of goats?* but in order that we might know that he is the origin of all our good and the end to which all is to be referred.

And, therefore, it is lawful to offer sacrifice to no one except God, for God is our end and we can add nothing to him: and so we ought to glorify him so that everything that we do we do for his glory. *1 Corinthians 10: Do all things for the glory of God.*

Likewise, God is our origin and, accordingly, we owe him honour. *Malachi 1: If I am Lord, where is my honour?* And therefore he says, *Bring to the Lord glory and honour. 1 Timothy 1: To God alone honour and glory.*

*Adore the Lord.* Here he shows the spiritual sacrifice: first showing how we ought to glorify him; second, how we ought to honour him.

He then says that because God himself is full of glory we ought on that account to glorify him: whence he says, *Bring to the Lord glory to his name.*

He is in himself full of glory, but his name should be full of glory among us, that is, it is to become glorious in awareness. And in order that he might be full of glory and illustrious among us, we must give him honour.

And he therefore says: *Adore the Lord in his holy court,* that is, the Church which is like the heavenly court.

Or, *in the court,* that is, the mind. *John 4: True worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and in truth.*

*The voice of the Lord is upon the waters.* Here he sets forth divine favours: first, those of the past; second, those of the future, as he says, *The Lord makes the flood to dwell.*

About the first, he makes two points. First, he enumerates outstanding favours; second, he concludes the thanksgiving, as he says, *And in his temple.*

Outstanding favours can be explained figuratively and mystically. Figuratively for instance: so he first sets forth two outstanding favours, namely, the departure, and, secondly, after the departure: concerning this we have, *The voice of the Lord breaking.* And first he recalls the favour of the leading out from Egypt; secondly, he clarifies it.

Therefore he says, *The voice,* that is, the command, *of the Lord* was *upon the waters* of the divided sea, as it is told in *Exodus 14.*

And he extols this in three ways. First, from the part of origin: *God of majesty,* who, of course, is majesty itself. *Isaiah 6: The whole earth is full of his majesty. He thundered:* for Moses had lifted up his hands, the wind blew. And he calls this blowing *thundered* for thunder was made out of the agitation of the winds.

Next, from the part of matter, for he dried up not a few waters but many, namely, a sea. *Isaiah 41: Have I not dried up the sea? Wisdom 10: He bore them over through a great water.*

Next, from the part of the effect, from what was of great strength to what cast down his enemies. *Exodus 15: Your right hand, O Lord, has struck the enemy.* And on account of this it is said, *The voice of the Lord in Power.*

Then another effect is that of magnificence: whence it is said, *The voice of the Lord in magnificence,* for he made them cross over through a dry sea, whence it follows in the same place, namely *Exodus 15: Glorious in holiness, terrible and praiseworthy, alone working wonders.*

*The voice of the Lord breaking the cedars* and *The Lord will break the cedars of Lebanon.* Next he recalls extraordinary favours after the crossing; and this can be understood in two ways. First, by pulling away from evil, second, by bringing together good things, as we have it, *The voice of the Lord breaking.*

About the first, he makes two points. First, he sets forth the favours, and second, the ease with which they are conferred, at, *And he will crush them.*

He then says, *The voice of the Lord breaking the cedars.* The cedars are great men and signify the Amorites who were great and strong. *Amos 2: I have driven out the Amorites from before his face, whose height was the height of cedars, and he himself was as strong as an oak.*

Then in the whole land that had been promised to them, there were Amorites and other peoples who could not be driven out and subjugated until the time of David. All the Amorites as yet dwelt about Lebanon, as it is told in *Joshua 15.* And therefore he says, *The Lord will break the cedars of Lebanon,* that is, the Amorites who still lived there, and *He will reduce them to pieces as a calf of Lebanon and Sharon as a son of unicorns.*

The Hebrews have it thus: *And he will crush them like a calf of Lebanon, and Sharon like a son of buffaloes.* And the literal sense is: that there is a difference between buffaloes and cattle, since buffaloes are nourished in marshes, cattle, however, in mountains. Now there were on Mt. Lebanon many pastures in which grew great cedars. Likewise were there calves and cattle.

He says therefore: thus will it be easy for God to crush the cedars, as if he were crushing a calf of Sharon. Sharon is indeed the place, *Isaiah 35: The splendour of Carmel and Sharon.* This place where buffaloes graze is watery, as he might say: Sharon indeed will he crush, like a son of a buffalo, or a calf.

Mystically, *The voice of the Lord upon the waters* signifies a double favour, namely, of conversion and of the gifts that are given to the converted.

*The voice of the Lord in power.* The second mystery can be explained in two ways. In one way, it refers to the prophecy of Christ: and thus it treats of the conversion of the Jews and the gentiles. Of the Jews, when he says, *Upon the waters,* men are likened to waters: because, like waters, men flow and will not return. *2 Kings 14.*

Whence it is said that the voice, that is, the prophecy of the Lord, is upon the waters, that is, upon the Jewish people, for the Jews were converted to God out of a doctrine of God not yet made Man, but expected.

Concerning the conversion of the gentiles, it follows when he says, *The God of majesty has thundered.* Thunder is formed in the cloud, in which is signified the Incarnation itself, which is like a cloud. *Isaiah 19: Behold the Lord will ascend upon a swift cloud.*

*Therefore the God of majesty thundered;* that is, the Almighty has thundered through prophecy from the cloud of his flesh. *Job 37: He will thunder with his voice wonderfully.*

And he says, *Upon many waters* because the voice of the incarnate Lord was not only upon the Jews, but also upon the gentiles. *Isaiah 49: I have given you to be the light of the gentiles that you might be my salvation even to the farthest part of the earth.*

Or, *Upon the waters of Baptism,* whence that psalm was sung at the time Christ was baptised.

*The voice of the Lord in power.* Further, the psalm, according to the mystical understanding, has touched the mystery of the conversion of Jews and gentiles; here, however, he discusses the favour of temporal gifts. And he makes three points about this. First, he sets forth the spiritual gifts; second, he presents the rooting out of vices which follows from these gifts, *The voice of the Lord breaking;* third, a setting out, or advancement to good, *The voice of the Lord preparing.*

In the spiritual gifts, there is this difference, that, to those to whom spiritual gifts are given, to the same ones are given those things that harmonise with them, and they must be carried out and they are of necessity for salvation: given to them for certain difficult tasks, such as the working of miracles and things of that sort.

As to the first, he says, *The voice of the Lord in power;* that is, from the command of the Lord power is given to accomplish his precepts.

As to the second, he says, *The voice of the Lord in magnificence,* that is, from the command of the Lord power is given to his holy ones for doing great things. *Psalm 67: Upon Israel is his magnificence.*

A gloss adapts these to the gifts of the Holy Ghost who, after the conversion of the faithful to the gift of fear, arises in divine power to which the admission of fears relates.

Magnificence relates to the gift of knowledge because to do great things relates to knowledge. *Ecclesiasticus 25: How great is he that finds wisdom.*

*The voice of the Lord breaking.* Here he treats of the removal of vices, and first he touches on the vice of pride, and secondly of concupiscence: *The voice of the Lord dividing the flame of fire;* third, the vice of infidelity, or disdain: *The voice of the Lord shaking the desert.*

He shows first the removal of pride. Whence it is to be observed that just as fir-trees are great, so also are cedars; and by them pride is signified.

Therefore he says, *The voice of the Lord breaking the cedars,* that is, the power of the divine command upon all the proud. *Isaiah 14: Your pride is brought down to hell.*

*And he will break the cedars of Lebanon,* that is, the voice of the Lord is upon the arrogant and proud, by breaking them by his power: for all the Kings were converted through this to Christ;

and finally, upon the cedars of Lebanon because leaders of the Jews were converted, as, for example, Nicodemus, *John 3.*

Likewise: *And he will crush them as a calf.* Here is set forth the completion of conversion.

Mt. Lebanon is especially fit for pasture, and the priests, on account of the abundance of sacrificial animals, used to make the cattle pasture there; and therefore, *He will crush them as a calf of Lebanon,* that is, he will bring them low like a calf of Lebanon that they might offer indeed themselves in sacrifice, as a calf that is nourished on Mt. Lebanon is offered. And this is obvious for many great men have exposed themselves to martyrdom for the sake of Christ. *Matthew 22: My oxen and my fatlings are killed.*

*And as the beloved sons of unicorns.* This can be read in two ways.

First, in order to point out authority for crushing, as if he said the beloved will do these things, and accordingly, beloved is put in the singular, as of one having authority. *This is my beloved Son. Matthew 3.* And he will do these things *as a son of unicorns,* that is, a son of the Jews, for the mystery of the Incarnation was performing these things. And the Jews are called unicorns inasmuch as they glory in the worship of the one God.

Or, he is called a unicorn because, according to his eternal generation he was without a mother, and according to his generation in time, he was a son without a father.

Otherwise, *Beloved, etc.,* that is, Christ, will suffer as an example of crushing that he might give an example of suffering to others. *1 Peter 2: Christ suffered for us, leaving you an example that you might follow his steps.*

And he suffers not insofar as he is God, but insofar as he is the son of Jewish unicorns. Let us return then to the literal sense.

*The voice of the Lord dividing the flame.* Here he recalls the favour whereby they were liberated from an evil inflicted from heaven.

It is told in *Numbers 11* that because of the murmuring of the people, fire attacked part of the camp, and at the lifting up of Moses' hand, the fire was put out. And this is why he says, *The voice,* that is, the command, *of the Lord dividing,* that is, destroying, *the flame of fire.*

In consequence, he recalls the favours which increase in good, and he sets forth three points. First, the favours of the multiplication of the people; second, the rearing of children; third, the leading through the desert.

The text of Jerome has: *The voice of the Lord bringing forth the desert.* Thus is it read in Joshua.

None of those who went out of Egypt and came into the desert entered into the land of the promise, except Joshua and Caleb, as is clear from *Numbers 14.* But all who entered it were born in the desert, and, therefore, he recalls the favour that the people were not wiped out.

Whence he says, *The voice of the Lord bringing forth,* that is, causing to give birth, specifically to *the desert of Kadesh,* for as far as the design of Moses was concerned, they, immediately upon going out of Egypt were to enter the land of the promise and come into Kadesh: whence they sent scouts, and they advised against it and feared to enter, and because of that sin all died. And because from that time they gave up going in, therefore all died in this desert.

Or, according to our text, *The voice of the Lord shaking the desert,* that is to cause propagation through the desert of Kadesh. *The Voice of the Lord preparing the stags.* Jerome has: *Assisting in the birth of stags.* The Hebrew has: *Preparing the mules.*

Stags abide in deserts: and because the children of Israel were forty years in the desert they are called stags: *Psalm 17: He has made my feet like those of stags:* for women had the advantage of giving birth and nursing.

*And he will lay bare the thick woods,* or forest pastures, for he showed him guidance through column of fire by night and of cloud by day. *Psalm 135: He led his people through the desert.*

Mystically, in what he says, *The voice of the Lord breaking,* he signifies the gift of fortitude. And he places here the removal of the sin of concupiscence when he says: *The voice of the Lord dividing the flame of fire,* that is, of concupiscence. *Wisdom 6: Longing for wisdom will lead to everlasting fire.*

And this nourishes other evils, about which *John 2* says: *Everything that is in the world is either longing of the eyes,* etc. And this confirms it. *Job 31: It is a fire that devours even to destruction.*

Basil explains it thus: " *The voice of the Lord dividing the flame of fire:* on the day of judgement, by divine power, the fire will be divided, for burning without light will be in the fire surrounding the condemned, and a fire bright without burning will be for the glory of the elect." And what he says here relates to the gift of counsel.

*The voice of the Lord shaking the desert.* Here he presents the removal of a two-fold infidelity, that is, of the gentiles and of the Jews.

As to the first, he says, *The voice of the Lord shaking the desert,* that is, he has moved the nations to faith by directing them to it. *Isaiah 54: Many are the sons of the deserted one* (that is, the gentile people), *more than those of her that has a husband,* that is, of the synagogue.

As to the second, he says, *The desert of Kadesh,* which is interpreted holy place of the law, because the Jews, made holy by the lawgiver, will be converted at the end of the world. *Isaiah 1: Our land is desolate, our cities are burnt by fire.* And this relates to the gift of understanding.

Then he brings up the favour that pertains to advancement in good, and first he sets forth its likeness to wisdom, secondly, its activity.

Therefore, he says, *The voice of the Lord preparing the stags,* that is, holy and perfect men: since, as stags drive away very poisonous things, so do holy men drive away every sin, and, just as stags walk through thorns without injury, so do holy men go through the vanity of the world without pleasure. In the second last chapter of *Genesis: Naphtali, a stag set free, giving expressions of beauty.*

And these things are made ready by God and not by ourselves, and God himself *will lay bare* to them *the thick woods,* that is, those things that were hidden from others. *Matthew 11: You have revealed them to little ones.*

And this pertains to the gift of wisdom. Next he concludes his thanksgiving for the before-mentioned favours, saying: *In his temple all will say glory. Psalm 148: Let youths and maidens, old men and Young Praise the name of the Lord.*

Another text has: *Everyone will say, or speak of glory.* It is true that everyone will have common and even spiritual gifts. And for this special gift, everyone will say of glory. In the last chapter of *Ecclesiasticus: To him who gives me justice, I shall give glory.*

*The Lord.* Here he treats of favours hoped for; and, first he mentions the power of the benefactor; secondly, he sets forth the favours he hopes for. *The Lord will give strength to his people.*

In the Hebrew we have: *The Lord sat upon on the flood* and this has a clear sense: as if he were saying: It is true for he did this for the people of Israel. For has there ever been anything of like power? Indeed, from the beginning of the world his judgements had been made manifest.

And he mentions one made manifest that, out of judgement on men's sin, brought on the flood. *And the Lord will sit as King forever,* judging the peoples in equity.

Jerome has it: *The Lord inhabits the flood,* or *causes to inhabit.* As the flood spread, the earth was emptied of its inhabitants. After, he again causes to inhabit the now destroyed earth by the multiplication of men.

This can be read mystically in three ways. In one way, as *The flood* becomes as the accusative attached to the infinitive *to inhabit:* for in Noah's ark did they alone inhabit the flood; and thus by Noah's ark the Church is signified and the holy ones who are in it dwell secure in a flood of tribulations.

In another way, and conversely, he dwells in his holy temple as in a flood. The flood is the world and carnal men are of the world. *Nahum 1: In the flood that passes by, he will make an ending.* Therefore, he will make the flood to dwell in his temple when they are converted, *and He will sit as King forever,* as it was explained above.

In another way, he inhabits the flood, that is, the baptismal waters, which he himself inhabits through the effect of grace. Then he mentions hoped for blessings: and first, those pertaining to our growth; secondly, those pertaining to our end.

As to the first, he says, *The Lord will give strength to his people,* through which they may be able to advance. *Isaiah 40: Who gives strength to the weary man and to those who are not he increases courage and might.*

As to the second he says: *The Lord will bless his people with peace. Isaiah 32: My people will sit in the beauty of peace, in the tabernacles of trust, in rich repose.*
