# Section 1 — Psalm 33

**(For David, when he changed his countenance before Achimelech, who dismissed him, and he went his way)**
**Psalm 33**

**I will bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall be always in my mouth**

**In the Lord shall my soul be praised:**

**let the meek hear and rejoice.**

**O magnify the Lord with me; and let us extol his name together.**

**I sought the Lord, and he heard me; and he delivered me from all my troubles.**

**Come ye to him and be enlightened; and your faces shall not be confounded.**

**This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him: and saved him out of all his troubles.**

**The angel of the Lord shall encamp round about them that fear him: and shall deliver them.**

**O taste, and see that the Lord is sweet: blessed is the man that hopeth in him.**

**Fear the Lord, all ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.**

**The rich have wanted, and have suffered hunger: but they that seek the Lord shall not be deprived of any good.**

**Come, children, hearken to me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.**

**Who is the man that desireth life: who loveth to see good days? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Turn away from evil and do good: seek after peace and pursue it.**

**The eyes of the Lord are upon the just: and his ears unto their prayers.**

**But the countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil things: to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.**

**The just cried, and the Lord heard them: and delivered them out of all their troubles.**

**The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart: and he will save the humble of spirit. Many are the afflictions of the just;**

**but out of them all will the Lord deliver them.**

**The Lord keepeth all their bones, not one of them shall be broken.**

**The death of the wicked is very evil: and they that hate the just shall be guilty.**

**The Lord will redeem the souls of this servants: and none of them that trust in him shall offend.**

[1] The title of this Psalm is *A Psalm of David when he changed his look in front of Abimelech, who released him, and David went away.*

The history of this psalm is found in 1 Kings 21, where it is said that David fled from the face of Saul and went to Achis the king of Geth. There his strength was recognized since the people of Geth knew he had slain the Philistine. Now these people were related to the Philistines and moreover were envious of David's strength, so David feared for his life. Thus, wishing to extricate himself out of this situation, he feigned insanity, which led the king to hold him in contempt. The account in 1 Kings 21 calls the king Achis, but here in this psalm he is named Abimelech. But this is not a problem since that king could claim both names: his personal name was Achis, but his family name was Abimelech. Now David changed his appearance by making himself look absurd. Thus the king sent him away and he left, for after being ejected David left him and withdrew.

In the mystical sense Christ changed his appearance when he changed his own sacrament, where the divine truth was hidden. In another way Christ changed the old paschal sacrament into the new in the presence of Abimelech, whose name means reign of my father. The Father of Christ is God according to His divinity, but David according to His humanity. The reign of David is the people of Judea, whereas the reign of God is the Church. Thus it may also be said that Christ changed his appearance in the presence of Abimelech, understood to be the Jews. For they were the reign of his father David, yet they did not know him. As Isaiah 53 says: *We saw him and he was not worth looking upon. And they held him in contempt, nor did we give him the slightest regard.* Christ also left for the gentiles. Achis could also signify the Jews, since his name means incredulous.

In the preceding Psalm, the Psalmist showed the dignity of the just. Now he invites others to praise God. The Psalm is divided into two parts: first is the exhortation to praise; second is some indispensable direction, which begins when he says *Come, children.*

Concerning the first part he does two things: first he treats of the praise of God; second he sets forth the matter of praise, where he says *I have sought.*

Concerning the first of these he does two things: first he presents an example of praise; second he encourages others to imitate it, where he says *Let them hear.*

And concerning the first of these he does two things: first he presents an example of praise, considered in its essence; second he presents the fruit of praising God, where he says *In the Lord he will be praised*.

So now taking each division in its turn, he says first of all *May I bless the lord*. Sometimes a person praises God for his own benefit, as when he speaks his praise in tongues. In that case the act of praise benefits only himself. But sometimes praise is spoken in order to console others, as when one prophesies among others. Thus there is a difference between *benedicere domino*, which is to confess the praise of God, and *benedicere dominum*, which is to do a good deed.

Then he says *at all times,* namely in times of adversity and prosperity. Contrast this with what Psalm 48 describes: *He will confess your name when you bless him.* Job (2) did the opposite: *If we receive goods things from the lord's hand, should we not also receive the bad?* And Tobit (4): *At all times bless God.* Now the one who praises God should not only bless God in his heart but also in his mouth. For vocal praise is necessary so that you may not only praise God but also be of help and encouragement to others. This is why he says, *His praise is in my mouth.* Thus also Isaiah 51: *Joy and delight will be found in it, thanksgiving, and the voice of praise.* He says *always*, meaning in every established time. He may also mean to be prepared in soul. He may even mean always doing good, which always redounds to the praise of God. Notice that this verse is sung at Sext, the hour of Christ's passion, which is in us the cause of praise.

[2] Then at *in the lord*, the Psalmist begins to discourse on the fruits of praise. First he says *in the lord my soul will be praised*. For the good of the friend is always taken to be one's own good. Thus, he says *in the praise of God is also my own praise.* If God is great, then it holds that his friend is great. As in Psalm 117: *My courage and my praise is the lord.* He says *my soul* because spiritual joy lies principally there.

[3] Next when he says *let them listen*, he instructs others first on the cause of praise, and then when he says *magnify* he instructs them on the act of praise itself. The principle of praise is interior joy. Hence he says *let the gentle listen.* Thus they will rejoice in all things that are of God. But the violent do not rejoice; they rebel. And so he says *let them listen*, since this kind of joy comes from hearing about the good deeds of others.

[4] Then when he says *magnify*, he urges others to praise. First to an interior praise, then to an exterior, when he says *and let us exalt.* On the first point he says *magnify the lord with me*, that is, magnify and praise God, since God's goodness and greatness are the same. For in those things whose greatness is not of size, to be greater is to be better, as Augustine argues in *De Trinitate*. Thus he says *magnify,* as does Luke 1: *my soul magnifies the lord*. This echoes what he said earlier: *May I bless the lord.* On the second point he says *and let us exalt his name*. Now one is said to be exalted up high when many exalt, as Ecclesiasticus says: *all you glorifying God, exalt Him, as much as you can,* etc. He then says *in the selfsame*, meaning together in harmony. And this echoes what he said earlier: *His praise is in my mouth.*

[5] Next when he says *I have sought*, he sets forth the content of the praise, namely, divine mercy on the one being heard. On this first point he does two things: first he establishes the clemency in his being heard; then he establishes the merit in his being heard, when he says *this pauper cried out.* On the first of these he does two things: first he sets out the benefit received; then he invites others to reap the same benefit when he says *he approaches*, etc. Concerning the first of these, he does three things: first, he sets forth his petition; second, he sets forth the hearkening, when he says *and he heard;* third, he shows the effect of the hearkening, when he says *and from all.*

So first of all he says *I have sought the lord.* To see the lord Himself is the best of choices, as the lord's Prayer makes clear in its first petition: *Hallowed be Thy Name*. This is also confirmed in Isaiah 55: *seek the lord while he may be found.* Therefore, he says *I have sought*, as if to say, I have sought with great diligence. And thus follows the hearkening: *and he heard me.* The effect of the hearkening is that *from my all tribulations he rescued me.* For sometimes he rescued the just from tribulations such that they would suffer no tribulations whatsoever, as in Job 5: *in six tribulations he will rescue you, and in the seventh evil will not touch you.* Sometimes he rescues the just so that they are not greatly troubled, as expressed in Psalm 93: *as many sorrows as there are in my heart, so many of your consolations have gladdened my soul*. 2 Corinthians 1 also expresses this: *the one who consoles us in every one of our tribulations*. This interior consolation always belongs to the saints. Moreover, he also rescues external relations, thus evil can never separate the saints from Christ, as expressed in Romans 8: *who will separate us from the charity of Christ?*

[6] Then when he says *approach him and be enlightened and your faces*, etc., he invites others to attain the benefit of praise. On this point he does two things: he first invites; second he describes what will come to pass for those who accept the invitation, when he says *and your faces will not be confused.* Therefore he says *approach him*, through faith and charity, as James 4 says: *come close to God and he will come close to you.* Then he adds *and be enlightened.* God is light and one who approaches the light will be illuminated. Isaiah 60: *Rise up* (through love) *and be enlightened.* Deuteronomy 33: *The man who sits at his feet will receive his teaching.* Now the result of this invitation is that *your faces will not be confused* by being refused. In other words, you will not suffer confusion *because there is none in those hoping in him* (Daniel 3). Or in another interpretation, *your faces*, that is, your minds, will not be confused by falling aside from truth.

[7] Then when he says *this poor man cried out*, he shows the merit of getting heard. On this point he does three things: first he describes the merit itself; second he promises a similar benefit to others, when he says *the angel encamps;* third he urges an experience, when he says *taste.* Therefore first he says *this poor man*. Now this verse is identical in meaning to the verse *I have sought*. Only the modes of speech differ: in the earlier verse he speaks in the first person, but in this later verse he speaks in the third person. So the only question is: who is this poor man? The Psalmist could be either pointing to himself or to Christ. In saying *poor man*, he hints at the merit of the petition: for the poor man is poor in spirit, or poor in pride, or poor in earthly desires. And such people get heard, as Judith 9 attests: *the prayer of the humble and gentle are always pleasing to you.* And Psalm 32: *he regarded the prayer of the humble*, etc. He cried out with the power of interior disposition, as in Isaiah 6: *The seraphim were crying out one to the other, saying Holy, Holy, Holy, etc.*

[8] Second, when he says *the Angel encamps*, he promises a similar benefit, as if he were saying: others will be heard just like the poor man. Now many codices have *the Angel of the lord encamps.* Jerome has *the Angel of the lord encircles about those who fear him*. The Psalmist says therefore *the Angel of the lord,* in offering protection by the splendor of his light *, encamps around them.* As Psalm 124 says: *round about it are his mountains*, namely Angels. And in 4 Kings 6 [2 Chronicles 32:7]: *many more are with us than with them.* And farther on: *behold the mountain*, etc. Therefore the Angel encamps, that is, sets up camp. Hebrews 1: *all are ministering spirits.*

*And he will save them,* namely by fighting off the enemy and Demons. Judith 7: *the children of Israel do not put their trust in the lance or arrow, but the mountains defend them*, namely Angels, or Christ. Isaiah 9, according to the Septuagint: *he will be called the Angel of great counsel*. For insofar as he is man he is sent by God. Or another reading is that Angel signifies the prelate of the Church, as in Malachi 2: *The Angel of the lord of hosts.* For the prelates of the Church ought to guard their flock.

[9] Third, when the Psalmist says *taste and see how sweet*, he urges an experience. On this point he does two things: he exhorts others first to experience friendship with God and second to keep the fear of God, when he says *fear*. On the first point he does two things: first he urges the experience; second he describes the effect of the experience, when he says *and see how*.

And so he says *taste and see*, etc. Now the experience of anything comes through the senses but in different ways, depending on whether the object is close or at some distance. If it is removed at a distance, then the experience of it comes through sight, smell or hearing. If it is close, then touch and taste come into play, but each in its own way. For touch senses the outside of the object, whereas taste senses the inside. Now God is not far from us nor outside us, but rather He is in us, as Jeremiah 14 says: *You are in us, O lord.* Thus the experience of divine goodness is called tasting, as 1 Peter 2 says: *but if you taste how sweet*, etc. And at the end of Proverbs: *She tasted and saw that her dealings were good*.

Next he shows that the effect of this experience is twofold: the certitude of understanding and the security of love. With respect to the first effect he says *see*. Now, although in the physical world something is first seen and then tasted, in the spiritual world it is just the opposite. For one who does not taste does not know. Thus he says first *taste* and then *see*. With respect to the second effect he says *how sweet is the lord*. Wisdom 12: *O lord, how good and sweet is your spirit in us!* Psalm 30: *How great is the abundance of your sweetness.*

Then he says *Blessed the man who hopes in him*. Isaiah 30: *Blessed are all those who long for him.*

[10] Then when he says *fear*, he urges first the observance of the fear of the lord; second he gives the cause of the fear, when he says *since there is not*; third he manifests the cause, when he says *the rich hungered*.

And so he says *sweet and pleasant is the lord.* But for whom? For those who fear him. Therefore, *fear the lord all his saints*. He says *saints* because no one can be holy unless he is fearing. He says this also because not only is fear necessary for those rising to sanctity but even for those remaining in it. Ecclesiasticus 27: *If you do not hold fast in the fear of the lord, your house will be forcefully turned up against you.* The reasons is that nothing eliminates holiness more than pride, but fear binds pride. Ecclesiastes 7: *The one who fears God slights nothing.* Ecclesiasticus 40: *There is no abasement in fearing the lord.*

The Psalmist himself adds the reason why one should fear God: *for there is no want among those who fear him.* Now this can be explained in several ways. First there is no lack of spiritual goods, as Isaiah 33 says: *wealth of salvation, wisdom and knowledge; the fear of the lord is his treasure*. Second, there is no lack of bodily needs. For although one who fears God may at times possess very little, this does not mean that he is impoverished. The destitute may think themselves failures, but those who fear God are content with what they have, as expressed in Phillipians 4: *everywhere and in all things I am provided for,* etc. Third, God succors those seeking Him in times of necessity.

Now Augustine poses an objection in *On the Lord's Sermon on the Mount*: the Apostle says in 1 Corinthians 4, *even at this hour we are hungry, thirsty and naked,* so how is this not an example of destitution in those who fear God? Augustine replies that God is both nourisher and doctor, and a doctor takes food away from a sick man, making him to hunger and thirst, for the sake of healing him. Thus also God, for the sake of our salvation, sometimes sends poverty, sometimes wealth, and sometimes grants length of days, while sometimes a brief time.

[11] When the Psalmist goes on to say *the rich have suffered lack*, he manifests the reason through the contrary. For the contrary of the fear of the lord is the emotional disposition of those who have given their souls over to riches. Therefore, first he shows that the wealthy are also poor; then he shows that those who seek God lack nothing, when he says *they that seek*.

And so he says *the rich have been in need*, that is, spiritually. In other words, those who are rich in worldly goods are lacking in spiritual riches. Apocalypse 3: *You say, "I am rich and growing richer and have need of nothing." But you do not know that you are poor and miserable, destitute, blind and naked.* Plus, *they hunger*, that is, for spiritual goods. For the natural human appetite is for virtue. Even though the depraved appetite may aim at sin, nevertheless so far as it is natural, it desires virtues.

Another interpretation is that their need and hunger lie in store for them, as Isaiah 65 states: *my servants will eat, but you will go hungry.* Literally, it could also be taken to mean that the rich are often reduced to poverty because the things of this world are fleeting. Luke 1: *He filled the hungry with good things*, etc. On the other hand are those *that seek the lord*. As Isaiah 55 says: *Seek the lord while he may be found,* etc. They are not diminished in any good thing, nor do they lack the perfect good. For they receive spiritual goods as desired and temporal goods as needed, as Luke 12 says: *Seek first the reign of God, and all these things shall be added unto you*. And Proverbs 10: *the desire of the just shall be granted*. But their desire is for every good thing. Proverbs 11: *and thus they shall have all good.*

[12] *Come.* After the above exhortation to praise, the Psalmist now sets about the necessary instruction. On this point he does two things: he teaches first about the fear of God and then second about divine providence, when he says *the eyes of the lord*, etc. On the first point he does two things: first he sets forth a preface to his teaching and then he teaches, there at *who is the man.* The preface has three parts: first he renders his audience benevolent, then attentive (at *hear me*), then docile (at *I will teach you the fear of the lord*).

And so let us proceed to the first part: *Come children.* Since it belongs to parents to love their children, he calls them *children* so that his paternal love might render them benevolent. It also belongs to parents to invite their children to doctrine and to teach them. Thus he says *Come*, as in Genesis 49: *Now Jacob called his sons and said to them 'Gather together and I will speak of what will happen to you in the last days.'* And in Hebrews 12: *We have had the fathers of our flesh for teahers, and we have revered them.*

Next, the second part: *hear me*. Proverbs 1 says: *The wise man listening will be wiser*, etc. Ecclesiasticus 33 says: *Listen to me, you great ones and all the people, and you rulers of the Church*, etc.

Third, he renders his audience docile by announcing what he will instruct them about: *I will teach you the fear of the lord*. In other words, I will teach what fruit you will gather, if you fear God. Or another way of understanding the verse: I will teach you how to fear God. And he begins well with fear, for in knowledge one should always begin with the elements. As Proverbs 1 says: *the fear of the lord is the beginning of wisdom,* that is, of divine wisdom.

[13] Next he begins his teaching when he says: *who is the man.* Concerning this he does two things: first he teaches the fruit of fear; and then he teaches on fear itself, when he says *forbid your tongue*.

And so he says *who is the man who desires life.* For man desires two things: long life and prosperity. But because a long yet bad life ought to be shunned, he says *who is the man who desires life.* Now man gains life through fear of the lord, which is the beginning of wisdom, as Psalm 110 says, and without this wisdom there is no life. Thus Proverbs 8 says: *find me, and you will find life.* Now some people live out their lives in toil and trouble, as Genesis 47 says: *the days of my wandering life are one hundred thirty years, few and evil.* And so the Psalmist says *he desires to see the good days*, that is, the days of plenty, for in the days of eternity everything is good. As Psalm 83 says: *one day in your courts is better than a thousand.*

Next he shows the effect of fear, first in speech and then in action, there at *turn away*. In speech there are two things to avoid: manifest evil and fraudulent good. With respect to the first, he says *keep your tongue from evil*, that is, the evil of detraction, calumny and false witness. Ephesians 4: *Let no evil speech come from your mouth*. James 1: *If anyone thinks himself religious but does not restrain his tongue*, etc. With respect to the second, he says *and let your lips not speak deception*, as if he were saying, do not even offer good things in deceit. As Psalm 11 says: *May the lord scatter the deceitful tongue.* Notice that he speaks first of restraining the tongue and then afterwards of the lips. For one who wishes to speak first moves the tongue, then the lips. The tongue also gives words their initial form, whereas the lips make each word distinct.

Next the Psalmist shows that two things should be done with respect to action. For man ought to order his life first with respect to himself, which the Psalmist addresses when he says *turn away*; then second with respect to his neighbor, which he addresses when he says *seek after*, etc. On the first point he does two things, which correspond to the different parts of justice, namely, to turn away from evil and to do good, which he touches on at *do good*. He says therefore *turn away from evil*, as does Ecclesiasticus 7: *Do no evil,* etc. Now turning from evil is not of itself meritorious, if one has in mind only a negation. For avoiding evil only in order to avoid the punishment consequent upon doing the evil is not the way to acquire life. Thus it follows that avoiding evil is merits nothing if the will is not formed in charity, which turns away from evil for the sake of God. *And do good*, as Isaiah 1 says: *learn to do good.*

Now with respect to one's neighbor he says *seek after peace*, etc. Sometimes it happens that your neighbor fights against you, and then it belongs to you to seek after peace. Thus he says *seek after peace*, as Romans 12 says: *If possible, as far as it lies in you, have peace with all men.* Sometimes however your neighbor is seeking peace with you, and then it behooves you to follow after it, too. Thus he says *pursue it*.

Another way to read this is that the peace he speaks about is the interior kind. And he is asking you to seek it in this life. But it is not to be had perfectly here, *for the flesh desires against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh*, Galatians 5. Nevertheless he says *pursue it*, so that you may possess it more, and although imperfectly here, perfectly in the future, where *the people will sit in the beauty of peace*, Isaiah 32.

Yet another way to interpret *seek after peace* is as to seek after Christ, *who is our peace*, Ephesians 2, and to follow him, as Ecclesiastes 2: *who is the man that can follow the king his maker?*

[14] Next, when he says *the eyes of the lord are upon the just*, he begins to teach about divine providence. On this he does two things: first he sets before us divine providence itself; then he shows the effect of divine providence, at *the just have cried out*. Concerning this he does two things: he describes divine providence first in relation to the good and then in relation to the bad, at *the face of the lord.*

He says therefore *the eyes of the lord*, etc. Concerning people under our care or authority, we attend to two things: to their deeds with our eyes (which the Psalmist touches on at *the eyes of the lord*), and to their words with our ears (at *and his ears*). Now although in God there is neither sight nor hearing, but only his wisdom, nevertheless because words and deeds are different, he is said to have both sight and hearing. The eyes signify the seeing of deeds, whereas the ears signify the hearing of words. Thus the Psalmist says *the eyes of the lord are upon the just*, that is, by a look of approval. 2 Timothy 2 states: *the lord knows his own*. And Ecclesiasticus 15: *the eyes of the lord are toward those who fear him*, etc. *And his ears*, signifying his intention to hear our their prayers. For whoever wishes to hear another out so as to understand, freely listens to that one's petitions. Thus, through this the Psalmist signifies that God wishes to hear. And he also says *unto their prayers*, because God hears while they are yet speaking, as Isaiah 65 says: *as they are yet speaking, I will hear them.*

[15] Next when he says *the face of the lord is against evil doers*, etc., he shows how the providence of the lord deals with evil ones. On this point he does two things: he shows first that divine providence does indeed cover the evil, and then second how it deals with the good in a different way, at *to destroy them*.

And so he says *the face of the lord,* etc. He said above that the eyes of the lord are upon the just. Perhaps an evil person will say, "If the eyes of the lord are not upon me, I can sin freely, since he does not see." As Job 22 says: *the clouds are his hiding place, and he does not consider our matters*. And Ezechiel 8: *the lord does not see, for he has deserted the earth*. But it is not so, for the face of the lord is against the wicked. Proverbs 15: *hell and destruction are before the lord*. The Psalmist says *the face of the lord* to signify a look of anger on the wicked. But for what purpose would God look on them? Without a doubt, *to cut off their memory from the earth*.

Now this can be understood in two ways. First it can refer to earth as it is now, and thus there are two ways to understand cutting off their memory: either the memory of them ceases to exist altogether or only the evil memory, as in Proverbs 10: *the name of the impious grows rotten*. Many wicked people try to have their memory preserved to no avail. However, if the memory of some of them does last, it can still be said to perish since it is rotten and evil. Psalm 9: *their memory perishes with a clamor.* Second, this can also refer to the land of the living. But do not the saints remember the impious? For if they did not recall the wicked things they suffered, why is it that *the just man will rejoice when he sees his vindication* (Psalm 57)? I respond: It needs to be said that they do indeed remember the wicked, but not unto good, since they do not recall any compassion or mercy from them, nor do they pray for them. As Luke 16 says: *there is fixed a great chasm*, etc. That is, even if they wished, they could not show mercy, for they are together with God, where they cannot will anything except what the justice of God has decreed. Isaiah 26: *you have inflicted them, and have purged all memory of them*.

[16] Next when he says *they have cried out*, he describes the effect of divine providence, with respect first to the good and then to the wicked, at *the death of the sinners*. On the first point he does two things: he shows first how the ears of the lord bend toward the prayers of the just; then he shows how the eyes of the lord are upon them, at *the lord is near*. On the first of these he does three things: first he presents the prayer of the saints; second he describes how they are heard, at *and the lord hearkened to them*; third he describes the effect of being heard, at *and from all*.

And so he says *they have cried out.* The prayer of the saints is said to be a crying out, as in Isaiah 19: *for they will cry out to the lord at the face of their oppressor*. And at the end of James: *their cry entered the ears of the lord of Hosts.* Now a cry is a loud voice. The prayer of the saints is a loud voice for two reasons: because of the depth of love and the length of the prayer, for they pray for all eternity. As Matthew 6 says: *seek first the kingdom of God*. *And the lord heard them* because he has given me to seek. Psalm 119: *I cried out to the lord in tribulation,* etc.

Next follows the effect of being heard: *and from all tribulations*, etc., such that they do not suffer these trials. Or if they do suffer, still they will not be overwhelmed. As Hebrews 11 says: *they have been made strong in war*. Or, it could signify that they become liberated from Limbo, as Zacharias 9 says: *you however by the blood of the testament have led the prisoners out of the pit*, etc. And Psalm 53: *the poor man cried out, and the lord heard him, and from all*, etc.

[17] Now when he says *the lord is near*, he shows how the eyes of the lord are upon the just. On this he does three things: first he describes the merit of the just; second their imminent danger, at *many are the afflictions*; third the help he offer them, at *and from all these.*

On the first of these he does two things, for there is a twofold merit of the just, on the basis of which they are promised the mercy of God. He touches first on the merit of contrition of sins, and he does this at *the lord is near*, etc. As Psalm 144 says: *the lord is near to all who call upon him*. Now some people are truly in a miserable state and yet do not realize it and thus are not contrite. They do not receive mercy. As Apocalypse 3 says: *You say, "I am rich and getting richer, and have need of nothing." But you do not know you are poor, miserable and impoverished, blind and naked.* For it is necessary to recognize one's misery by heartfelt bemoaning. And so he said *to those who are troubled in heart*. This is the contrition of sins. As Isaiah 66 says: *Whom will I regard except the one poor and little and contrite of spirit*, etc. And Matthew 5: *blessed are those who mourn,* etc. The second thing about the merit of the just he mentions when he says *and the humble of spirit he will save.* He says of spirit and not of words, for as Ecclesiasticus 19 says: *there is one who wickedly humbles himself, and his interior*, etc. Therefore, the humble in spirit, who have true humility in their heart, will be saved. Proverbs 29: *He will raise up the humble in spirit.*

Next, he describes the imminent danger, namely, that there are many tribulations awaiting the just. Lamentations 1: *many are my tears*, etc. 2 Timothy 3: *all who wish to live piously in Christ will suffer persecution.* And they will suffer these things at the hands of persecutors. Psalm 118: *many are they who persecute me and harass me.* Again, the just also sorrow in seeing others sin. 2 Peter 2 states: *dwelling among hem who from day to day vexed the just soul with iniquity.* Again, they suffer from the temptations of the world, the flesh and the enemy. As Galatians 5 says: *the flesh desires against the spirit*, etc.

[18] Next when he says *and from all these he will save them*, he describes the twofold help offered to them: first, they are completely freed (*and from all these the lord will free them*); second, they will not succumb to their tribulations (*the lord guards*, etc.).

And so he says *and from all these tribulations the lord will free them*, partly now, but perfectly in the future, when, as Apocalypse 7 says, *they will not hunger nor thirst for more*, etc. Ecclesiasticus 51 says: *you have freed me according to the greatness of your name's mercy*. And 2 Machabees 1: *having been free by God from great peril, let us give great thanks to him.*

[19] Then when he says *the lord guards,* he shows how God liberates them, lest they succumb. He says therefore that *the lord guards all their bones*. Just as sight is in the eye, so also courage is in the bones and nerves. And so just as sight is signified through the image of the eye, so also courage and virtue through the image of bone. For bones hold up the body, just as virtue sustains human life. So while in the future he will completely free them, in the meantime he keeps their bones, that is, virtues, which shine in adversity. Another interpretation is that *bones* signifies perfect men, whom the lord guards. Ezechiel 37: *the lord God speaks to these bones, "Behold, I have sent my spirit unto you, and you will live, and I will clothe you with flesh*." *Not one among them will be broken*, for the one God keeps will have no virtue fail him in times of trouble. Charity, for example, prevailed against hatred in the saints, for they prayed for their persecutors. Meekness prevailed against anger, for there was no sound of complaint. Patience prevailed against injustice, for they in their suffering gained their own souls. Thus Exodus 12 says of the paschal lamb: *not a bone in it will you break*. Psalm 36: *when he falls, he will not be bruised*. Another interpretation is that *one of these* signifies the predestined, as in John 17: *not one among them will perish, except the son of perdition.*

[20] Then when he says *the death of sinners*, he describes the effect of divine providence on the wicked. To this end he does two things: first he describes the perils of the wicked; second, he shows how God liberates his saints from the wicked, at *the lord will redeem.* On the first point he does two things: he shows first the punishment the unjust suffer **[ostendit malum justorum (!) quod patiuntur in se]**, then what befalls those who persecute the good, at *and those who hate*.

And so he says *the death*, meaning both bodily and spiritual. The bodily death is indeed the worst among the wicked, for they are sent to the worst place. As Luke 16 says: *the rich man died and was buried in Hell*. Another reason is that they lose the hope of grace after death. As Proverbs 11 says: *when the wicked man dies, there will be no hope*. Therefore the death of sinners is worst of all, for they die in both body and soul. Now concerning spiritual death, Ephesians 5 says: *rise up from the dead*. This state of the dead is the worst. For since death is the deprivation of life, the greater the good that gets deprived, the worse the death. But spiritual death deprives the soul of the life of grace, which is the best since it comes from God. As 1 Corinthians 6 states: *the man who adheres to God is one spirit.* Therefore, such a death is the worst. Jerome holds that wickedness kills, that is, slays, the impious. This is the kind of wickedness that brings about death to sinners. As Romans 6 states: *the wages of sin is death*.

Next he shows what befalls the evil when they persecute the just. As Luke 10 says: *those who despise you, despise me.* And thus the Psalmist says *and those who hate the just are guilty*. As Proverbs 29 says: *bloodthirsty men hate the simplehearted*. If therefore the man who hates God commits sin, so also the one who hates the servants of God.

[21] Then when he says *the lord will redeem*, he show how the good are freed from these dangers: first how they are freed from past sins and then how they are protected from future sins, at *and they will not sin*. He says therefore *the lord will redeem the souls of his servants.* Perhaps it may be objected that, if the death of sinners is the worst, then since no one is so just as not to have sinned, it follows that even the death of the just is the worst. To exclude this the Psalmist says *the lord will redeem the souls of his servants.* He will redeem the souls of his servants, in fact, by the price of his own death. Notice he does not say the souls of the free. For those who have been freed have shaken off the yoke of justice. As Romans 6 says: *freed from sin, made servants of God, what fruit did you have*, etc. Thus he says that these freemen have been made servants of God, but they are not redeemed. Only those who have shouldered the yoke of God are redeemed from guilt and punishment by the precious blood of Christ. As 1 Peter 1 says: *not by anything corruptible, like silver or gold, have you been redeemed from your empty life with the paternal tradition, but by the precious blood of Christ, an uncontaminated and immaculate lamb.* Hosea 13 says: *from death I will redeem them.*

Next he show how they are protected from future sin. For *they will not sin*, that is they will not sin to death, *all those who hope in him,* that is, in the lord. This is not on account of their own virtue, for even the virtuous fall. Thus Psalm 29: *I said in my abundance,* that is, in my virtue, *I will not be moved for all time. O lord, you favored me with virtue in addition to beauty. But you turned your face from me and I became troubled.* But those who hope in the lord, like the one who said in Wisdom 8: *I knew that I could not be content unless God gave it* - such a one does not sin. Protected by God, he will not sin to death [et cetera].
