# Section 1 — Psalm 34

**Judge, O Lord, those who are harming me; overcome those who are attacking me.**

**Take hold of arms and shield; and rise up to help me. Send forth the spear, and conclude against those who persecute me: say to my soul, "I am you safety."**

**Let them be confounded and stand in awe, those who are seeking after my soul. Let them be turned back and confounded, those who are plotting evils against me.**

**Let them become like dust before the wind, and let the angel of the Lord confine them. Let their way become dark and slippery, the angel of the Lord pursuing them.**

**For they have freely concealed their snare of destruction for me, needlessly have they reproached my soul.**

**Let the snare which he does not know come upon him, and let the plot which he conceals take hold of him: and into this very snare let him fall.**

**But my soul shall exult in the Lord, and shall be delighted in its salvation. All of my bones say, Who is like to you, O Lord? Delivering the helpless from the hand of those stronger than his, the needy and the poor from those despoiling him.**

**Unjust witnesses rising up were questioning me of things of which I had no knowledge. They were repaying me evil for good, the barrenness of my soul.**

**But I, when they were troubling me, was clothed in a hair-shirt. I humbled my soul with fasting: and my prayer was turned into my bosom.**

**As a neighbour and as our brother, so did I please: as one mourning and sorrowful, so was I humbled.**

**And they rejoiced against me, and came together: scourges were brought together upon me, and I did not know.**

**They were dissipated and felt no remorse: they tempted me, they mocked me with scorn: they gnashed upon me with their teeth.**

**O Lord, when will you regard me? Restore my soul from their malice, my only soul from the lions.**

**I will give thanks to you in the great church: I will praise you to a heavy people. Do not let those who are wrongly opposed to me, rejoice over me, those who have freely hated me and wink their eyes. For indeed they spoke peaceably to me, and speaking in the earth's anger, they devised plots. And they opened wide their mouth against me, and they said, Well done, well done, our eyes have seen.**

**You have seen, O Lord, be not silent: do not depart from me, O Lord.**

**Rise up and aspire to my judgment, my God and my Lord, in my cause. Judge me, O Lord, my God, according to your justice, and let them not rejoice over me. Let them not say in their hearts, Well done, well done it is to our mind; and let them not say, We will swallow him up.**

**Let them blush and be ashamed at the same time, those who rejoice at my evils. Let them be clothed in confusion and shame, those who speak wicked things against me.**

**Let them exult and be glad, those who desire my justice, and let them always say, "Let the Lord be magnified", those who desire the peace of his servant. And my tongue shall meditate you justice, your praise the whole day long.**

In the preceding Psalms, the dignity of the just was made clear. Here, however, help against the persecutions of the impious is implored, concerning which the psalmist does three things. First, he asks God's help against those sinners persecuting him, second, he acknowledges to himself such tribulations to be given according to sin, at, *Rebuke me not, O Lord, in your indignation* (Psalm 37), and third, he shows his faithfulness which he has in God, at, *With expectation I have waited* (Psalm 39).

Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he asks God's help against the persecution of the impious, second, he describes their wickedness, at, *I said: I will take heed to my ways* (Psalm 38) and third, he shows their prosperity is to be condemned, at, *Be not envious of evildoers* (Psalm 36).

The title is general, *For the leader, a Psalm for David himself.* Mystically, it pertains to Christ, the true David; and according to a mystical exposition, it is the second psalm of those which speak copiously concerning Christ's passion. The first was, *My God, my God, look upon me* (Psalm 21).

Therefore, whether this psalm is read either with respect to the person of David, Christ, or whomever, it does two things. First, it asks for the rejection of the impious, and second, assigns the cause, at, *Witnesses rising up.*

Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he asks for the condemnation of his enemies, second, he sets forth the destruction of their condemnation, namely their guilt, at *For they have freely,* and third, he assigns the fruit of this condemnation, at, *But my soul.*

Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he proposes his petition in general, and second, explains it, at, *Take hold of arms* etc.

Concerning the first, he asks for two things in general, namely their condemnation, and God's help, at, *Overcome.* He asks these two in opposition to two concerns: against those harming him, he asks for their condemnation, and against those attacking him, he asks for God's help.

Someone first attacks another, and then, prevailing, inflicts harm on him. Therefore, this order is reversed. For when someone attacks another, he does not immediately merit condemnation, but the one attacked is roused to ask for help. However, when he harms, then the one harmed asks for condemnation.

And for this reason he here distinguishes both, because harm is prior in the intention of the one who inflicts it; and thus he first asks for the condemnation of those harming. Therefore, he says, *Judge, O Lord, those who are harming me.*

Now, there is a three-fold judgment, namely, of condemnation - *James 2: Judgment is without mercy to one who has not shown mercy;* of cleansing - *1 Peter 4: For the time is, that judgement should begin at the house of the Lord;* and of discrimination - *Psalm 42: Judge me God, and discern my cause.*

The first is treated of here. A like petition is had at *Jeremiah 11: But you, O Lord Sabaoth, who judges rightly, and tries the reins and the hearts, let me see your revenge on them.*

But on the contrary, there is *Matthew 5: Pray for those who persecute and malign you.*

I respond by saying that in every imprecation of this kind, the meaning is two-fold. One which is said by way of prediction, as when he says, *Judge;* as if he were saying, you will judge.

Or so that all things are understood as brought forth not from the zeal of one's own vengeance, but of God's justice, to which the just conform themselves.

The second meaning is where, having been attacked, he desires to resist his adversary. And so, he says, *Overcome those who are attacking me,* (fit ?), namely let them not prevail over me - *Jeremiah 20: The Lord is with me as a strong warrior; Isaiah 63: I who speak justice, I am the one who fights in defense of salvation.*

Consequently, when he says, *Take hold of arms,* he explains his petition. He asks for two things, namely the condemnation of those doing harm, and the defeat of those attacking.

And for this reason, he explains these two in detail. First he explains the second, and then, the first, at *Let them be confounded.*

Concerning the first he sets down five things which are necessary for defense. The first is that he will arm himself, which he mentions saying, *Take hold of arms and shield.* The arms of God are his choosen ones - *Romans 6: Present your members as weapons of justice for God.* Thus, the angels are called the weapons of God, whom he uses to fight against the wicked - *Wisdom 5: The universe will fight with him against the foolhardy*

The shield of God is especially divine protection and his will, by which he shall defend - *Psalm 5: You surround them with the shield of your good will.* Therefore, he says, *Take hold of arms and shield,* that is, Send your holy ones and protect me by your good will.

Or, *Arms and shield* are virtues - *Isaiah 59: He will put on justice as a breast-plate, he will grasp the shield of impregnable justice.*

The second thing is that he goes forward into battle. And thus he says, *Rise up to help me.* God is said to sleep when man is in distress and does not experience divine help - *Matthew 8: A great storm arose on the sea, such that the boat was labouring upon the waves. The disciples were there, but Jesus was sleeping. They woke him, saying: "O Lord, save us! We are perishing!"...And getting up, he commanded the winds and the sea, and a great calm came to be; Psalm 43: Arise! Why are you asleep, O Lord?*

The third is the drawing of the sword. And so he says, *Send forth the spear.* Jerome has *Unsheathe the sword.* Spear is the same as sword. Nevertheless, *Send forth,* designates here the abundance of divine vengeance.

*Send forth the spear,* that is (in the Gloss) numerous punishments - *Zac. 13: Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that cleaveth to me.* Spear can be understood as the vengeance of God, the soul of Christ, or all the just, who are God's sword against the wicked - *1 Cor. 2: The spiritual person however judges of all things.*

The fourth is the blow. And thus he says, *And conclude* etc. Jerome has, *And block the way against those pursuing me,* as if he were saying, Strike, before they are able to gaurd against you. And this is also properly said to be concluded, as if one is unable to escape - *Job 10: Even though there is no one who can rescue me from your hand.*

Or, one is said to be concluded when one is convicted of falseness; and so he states, *Conclude,* as if he were saying, Convict them so that they might know their error.

The fifth is so that he who is shielded may be saved. And thus he says, *Say to my soul, I am your safety,* as if he were saying, Show this clearly through a sign, so that through inspiration, I might know you to be the safety of my soul - *Psalm 84: I will listen to what the Lord God says to me; Isaiah 43: I am the Lord, and there is no saviour besides me.*

Consequently, when he says *Let them be confounded,* he treats of the condemnation of the wicked. First he seeks their condemnation and second, he employs a similitude, at, *Let them become like dust* etc.

Concerning the first, he seeks in condemnation two things contrary to two which his evil persecutors intend. For they intend primarily to destroy him completely - *Psalm 82: Let the name of Israel be remembered no more -* and, second, they intend at least to bring some sort of evil to him. Concerning both of these he asks that these men be condemned (this latter intention is at *Let them be turned*).

Concerning the first he does two things. First he determines the punishment which he longs for, and second, applies their demerit, at, *Those who are seeking after my soul.*

He seeks a two-fold punishment, namely consternation and fear. The former exists when someone is not able to fulfill his intention, and the latter, when lacking purpose, he fears lest he fall into either a similar punishment, or the hands of his adversary. And so, with respect to the first, he says, *Let them be confounded;* and with respect to the second, *Let them stand in awe,* that is, let them fear a similar punishment.

A similar example is had at *Jeremiah 17: Let them be confounded who persecute me, and let me not be confounded* etc. This can also be taken so that it is understood to be said for the sake of their consternation, that is to say, concerning good consternation and good fear, so that they be advantageously confounded towards repentance.

*And let them stand in awe,* that is, let them fear punishment, even if it contradicts their merit, because they are seeking after my soul.

Concerning the second he says, *Let them be turned back.* He does two things about this. First, he prays so that they be hindered in their intention, and then, having been hindered, that they be confounded, at, *And let them be confounded.*

Therefore he says, *Let them be turned back,* not being able to advance in that which they intend, but *Let them fail,* in the future, and let them be confounded for this reason. It can also be taken in a good sense - *Let them be turned back,* so that they may follow me - *Mark 8: Get behind me Satan.*

*And let them be confounded,* concerning their sin - *Romans 6: What fruit did you have from those things of which you are now ashamed? Those who are plotting evils against me; Jeremiah 18: You, O Lord, know all their counsel against me unto death.*

Next when he says, *Let them become,* he employs a similitude. He treats of this one first, and then another, at, *Let their way.*

Therefore he says, *Let them become like dust.* For indeed he first desires justice against those who were seeking to destroy him totally. And thus he employs a similitude concerning a thing which is totally destroyed, namely dust.

The condition of dust comes as a consequence of three (aspects resulting from) its disposition; for dust is dry, and is divided into the smallest of bits. It is thus easily scattered.

And thus he says, *Let them become like dust,* so that just as dust is broken into many bits according to a lack of moisture, so too let the impious be.

Another aspect is the driving wind. And thus he says, *before the wind.* Sometimes, the wind signifies tribulation - *Job 27: The storm wind seizes him* etc. At other times, it signifies the trial itself of sin - *Isaiah 64: Our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.*

The third is from the impetus of an impelling wind. Thus he says, *And let the angel of the Lord confine them,* to this end, namely, that they be totally scattered. For just as some are made prosperous in greater virtue through the help of angels, so too it happens that they suffer tribulations in a higher degree from good or bad angels. For sometimes God also punishes sinners by means of good angels - *Isaiah 37: The angel of the Lord went out and slew a hundred and eighty five thousand in the camp of the Assyrians.*

Next when he says, *Let their way become,* he sets down the similitude concerning the second impediment, that is, concerning the progression of their way. And he describes three impediments in their path.

The first impediment is that of darkness, because at that time, anyone easily stumbles.

Therefore, *Let their way,* that is their progress, *become dark.*

The second is that it be slippery and suitable for their downfall - *Lamentations 4: Your steps have slipped in the way of our streets.*

And the third is that there be someone pursuing and constraining them, so as to destroy them more completely. *The angel of the Lord* etc. *Proverbs 17: (On rebellion alone is the wicked man bent, but) an unmerciful angel will be sent against him.* Therefore he says, *Let their way become dark,* of ignorance - *Psalm 81: They did not know, nor did they understand; they walk about in darkness.*... *and slippery,* that is, the carnal vices into which they easily fall.

*The angel of the Lord pursuing them* - an evil spirit leading them to sin, or a good angel permitting them to fall, so that having been humiliated they may rise again stronger.

Previously, the Psalmist desired that those harming him be judged and that those assaulting him fall themselves into direct assault. Here, however, he shows how they deservedly suffer these things. First, he places blame, and then punishment, at, *Let it come upon him.*

Concerning the first, he sets forth first an explanation of their malice, and second, their actions, at, *Needlessly.* With respect to the first, three things are set down which add to the weight of their guilt.

The first is their iniquity; and thus he says, *Freely.* The second is their fraud; and thus he says, *They have concealed.* The third is their cruelty; and thus he says, *Their snare of destruction.*

Therefore he says, *For freely.* If someone intends evil against another person who harms him, this does not seem to be totally unjust. But when one intends evil against another who in no way has harmed him, this is wholly unjust. And this is why he says, *Freely,* that is to say, without displeasure at what I had done - *John 15: They have hated me freely; Isaiah 52: The Assyrian has oppressed him without any cause.*

Their fraud, however, is noted when he says, *They have concealed for me,* because they intend evil for me by means, namely, of fraud - *Lamentations 3: He has become to me as a bear lying in wait, as a lion in concealed places; Psalm 9: He lies in wait like a lion in his lair.*

He shows their cruelty, because they prepare a trap leading to death. And so he says, *Their snare of destruction,* that is they carefully hide a snare leading to death - *Proverbs 1: Come with us, let us lie in wait for blood, let us carefully conceal a small snare for the innocent, let us devour for no purpose when* etc.

Secondly, when he says, *Needlessly have they reproached,* he sets forth their action, likewise without purpose. He says *They have reproached,* because they have inflicted opprobriums. An opprobrium is when someone imputes an offense to another, which is contrary to the latter's honor.

Sometimes an offense is imputed to another so that he be confounded and humbled. At other times, however, so that he might lose his life. And this is against his soul, for which reason he says, *My soul,* as if he were saying, On account of this did they act, so that they might deprive me totally of my life. In this way did the Jews impute offences to Christ worthy of death - *Luke 23: He is stirring up the people, teaching throughout all Judea; Psalm 68: The insults of those who revile you fell upon me.*

But this, *Needlessly,* that is, without purpose, as was said above, namely, freely - *John 8: Which of you can accuse me of sin?* Therefore, *Needlessly,* did they impute sin to him.

Or, *Needlessly,* that is in vain, with respect to their intention, because they were intending to destroy his faith - *John 11: What are we doing, for this man performs many signs? If we let him alone* etc.

Nevertheless, this counsel was taken needlessly, because the whole world was converted to the faith after his death.

Consequently when he says, *Let the snare come upon him which* etc., he sets down the punishment suitable to their guilt; and this because they are judged by the same justice by which they chose to judge - *Matthew 7: With that judgment you judge, you shall be judged.*

These very men were fraudulently intending the death of that very man; for that reason, the Psalmist entreats against them, either that his own will be conformed to the divine will, or that he be forewarned. And he asks for three things, namely that a snare be prepared for them, that they be captured, and that they not evade it.

With respect to the first, he says, *Let the snare come upon him,* namely the people, or he who is first among them. This snare can be understood in three ways.

First, according to the snare of punishment, because they were ensnared on account of Christ's death - *Isaiah 8: And very many of them shall stumble and fall, and shall be broken into pieces, and shall be snared and taken: because they have been taken captive before all nations.*

*Which they did not know,* he says, because they were not able to suspect the kind of punishment - *Luke 21: For there will be great distress over the land, and wrath upon this people, and they will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be led away as captives to all the nations; Matthew 24: For then there will be great tribulation, such as has not been seen from the beginning of the world until now, nor will be.*

Or, second, concerning the snare of blame - *1 Timothy 6: Those who seek to become rich, fall into temptation and into the snare of the devil;* as if he were saying, Let the snare of blame which he cannot foresee come to him; because it does not appear to the sinner that he is bound, but that he does as he wills; however in truth he has been bound, because as *Proverbs 5* states, *By the ropes of his own sin he will be bound.*

Or, third, concerning the snare of justice; as if he were saying, *Let the snare come upon him,* binding him to good. *Which they did not know,* because *1 Cor. 2: The sensual man does not perceive those things which are of the spirit.*

With respect to the second (thing for which the Psalmist asks), he says, *And let the plot which he conceals take hold of him,* that is let him be captured, just as he wanted to capture me in secret - *Proverbs 5: Their very own iniquities capture the impious.*

With respect to the third, he says, *And into this very snare let him fall,* that is, let him be overthrown by the snare, so that he does not free himself from it, *into this very snare,* that is, into the snare which he prepared for others - *Psalm 9: He has humbled him in his own snare, he will turn back to himself and fall, when* etc. In such a manner did this happen to the Jews, because they themselves handed Christ over to the gentiles, and afterwards they were handed over to the gentiles.

Then, when he says, *But my soul shall exult in the Lord, and shall be delighted in* etc., he describes the fruit of the condemnation of the wicked.

And he determines this fruit with respect to himself in a two-fold way. First, of a particular exaltation, and second, of divine reverence, at, *All of my bones.*

Concerning the first he does two things. First, he sets down the exaltation arising out of the judgement of God, and second, the subject matter of his exaltation, at, *And my soul shall be delighted.*

And so he says, I pray that it be done, but when you have done it, *My soul shall exalt in Jesus my Lord.* The reason for this is that through him I have received salvation: and thus he says, *And my soul shall be delighted in its salvation,* that is, in Christ, or in salvation effected through Christ - *Luke 1: My spirit shall exalt in God my Saviour.* And this can be referred to the Church.

Consequently, when he says, *All of my bones,* the second fruit is determined, which is of divine reverence. And concerning this he does two things. First, he describes this reverence for God, and second, he indicates the reason for it, at, *Delivering.*

And so, he says, *All of my bones.* All of man's strength is weakeness when compared to God: and thus the more knowledge someone has of God, the less he estimates his own ability to be.

But because it could be believed that what is feeble in us, is incomparable to God, not, however, what is strong, he shows it not to be thus, because anything which is strong, is incomparable to God, however great it is. For those things (of God) are limitless, while these other things (of man) are limited. And thus he says, *All of my bones,* that is, capacities. For indeed by 'bones' is understood capacity.

Or, they are said of the apostle, *who is like to you - Job 28: Gold or crystal will not be compared to him: nor will vessels of gold be exchanged for him.*

Or, of the person speaking, *All of my bones,* that is, whatever is virtuous in me.

Or, the knowledge of truth.

Or, fervor, charity, and other such things.

He says, *O Lord, who is like to you,* since it is asserted that nothing is comparable to God.

On the other hand, it seems that there is something comparable to God. Thus *Genesis 1: Let us make man to our own image and likeness.*

I respond by saying that things are said to be similar which have the same form and character. But similitude is two-fold.

One, which makes things perfectly alike, namely when two things share the same form of one nature.

However, there is a certain similitude between dissimilar things, namely when a form is really found in one thing, and in another by a remote participation: and thus the latter is similiar to the former, not because it has the same form, but because it approaches it according to an imperfect participation.

And it is in this way that similar things are said of God and of man, namely by remote participation of the latter in the former. It is as if he were saying, Both God and you exist, but your existence is by participation, while His is of His very essence, and likewise concerning other things. And for that reason, this similitude is of dissimilar things.

And what he says, he makes clear through effect. For someone appears powerful when he frees a weak person from the mighty. And God does this is our own world.

Powerful men are rich - *Proverbs 18: The substance of the rich man is the city of his strength* etc. God, however, frees the poor from him. For rich men first attack the poor, and then despoil the weak; but God frees them both from the rich.

With respect to the first he says, *Delivering the helpless,* without means, *From the hand of those stronger than his.*

With respect to the second he says, *And the needy and the poor from those despoiling him.* The needy is said to be anyone wanting, as it were, in necessary things; but the poor, having nothing in their purse.

And these three are the same, namely, the helpless, the needy and the poor - *Proverbs 28: (As) a roaring lion, and a hungry bear, (so is) a wicked prince over the poor people; Ezechiel 22: Her princes in the midst of her, are like wolves ravening the prey.*

The second part (of this psalm) is of first importance. Above, the Psalmist prayed for the repulsion of the impious. Here, however, he assigns the reason. First, he assails their malice, and second, seeks divine help, at, *Lord, when will you regard me?*

Concerning the first he does two things. First, he shows their wickedness, and second, their persistence in evil, at, *But I, when they were troubling me.* He shows their wickedness first with respect to their falseness, and second with respect to their ingratitude, at, *They were repaying.*

Therefore, with respect to the first, he says, *Unjust witnesses rising up,* like the leaders of the Jews and those led by them (like the people who were ignorant of the skill of proof); it is as if he were saying, Concerning things to which I did not assent, they *were questioning me*, namely because they were making an indictment concerning sins to which I did not assent - *2 Cor. 5: Him, who knew no sin, for us* etc.

With respect to the second he says, *They were repaying me evil for good,* by those things done in the Old Testament - *Micheas 6: O my people, what have I done to you* etc. And in the New Testament, because he gave sight to the blind, and bestowed many other blessings upon them - *John 10: I have shown many good works to you from my Father; Jeremiah 18: Shall evil be rendered for good* etc.

And those evil things, *the barrenness of my soul.* He makes an allusion to a parable at *Isaiah 5* concerning an excellent vineyard which he planted, and which became wild. The people of Israel were planted so as to produce good fruit, but they became barren. And this barrenness shows the people to be contrary to the soul of Christ, which they longed for. And so he says, *The barrenness of my soul.*

Previously, the Psalmist presented the wickedness of the Jews. Here, however, he shows their persistence, by which they endure in evil. And the persistence of others is condemned for this reason that by no means are they led to good by it.

The means by which some are usually called back to good is two-fold. First, through the sanctity of him whom they persecute, and second, through severe divine punishment.

Therefore he first shows their persistence in that they are not called back through sanctity. The second he discusses at *They were dissipated.*

Concerning the first he does two things. For the first, he describes his own sanctity in contrast to his tribulations, and second, their persistence in evil, at, *And against me.*

Concerning the first he does three things, insofar as sanctity consists in three things, namely in mortification of the body, devotion of the spirit, and devoutness of one's desire.

The Psalmist describes these three in order: for he speaks first concerning the body's mortification, second, of the spirit's devotion, at, *And my prayer,* and third, of desire's devoutness, at, *As a neighbour.*

Concerning the first he does two things. Since the flesh needs clothing and food, an affliction of the flesh has to arise either from the coarseness of one's clothing, or from the removal of food. And so he says first that he is afflicted by course clothing, and second, by removed food, at, *And I humbled.*

Therefore concerning the first he says, *But I, when they were troubling me, was clothed in a hair-shirt.* Hair-shirt is said metaphorically here, if it is interpreted concerning Christ, since he is not known to have worn a hair shirt. Now, this is made from the hair of she goats. And in the law, the mate of the she-goat was sacrificed for sin; and for this reason, the hair-shirt signifies sin. Therefore, Christ is said to wear a hair-shirt, since he has been clothed in flesh, indeed not sinful, but having the likeness of fallen flesh. We too ought to wear a hair-shirt, that is, repentance for our sins - *Isaiah 3: And instead of a fine dress, there will be a hair-shirt.*

However, concerning the second he says, *And I humbled my soul in fasting;* as if he were saying, Not only have I afflicted my body with course clothing, but with food, when I removed it from me by fasting. Concerning Christ's corporeal fasting, see *Matthew 4.*

This can also be said of Christ's spiritual fasting. For Christ longed for the salvation of mankind. This is that water which he asked for from the Samaritan at *John 4.* And on the cross he said, *I thirst - John 19.* But he used to fast for this purpose, because he found men to be far from salvation.

However, if it is said of the just person, then it can be understood in a two-fold way. In one way, that fasting is the cause of humility in the just: and by 'soul' is understood the way of flesh, so that it would be (the life) of sense *,* *I humbled* etc., that is, I humbled the pride of carnal life by mortifying it - *Psalm 109: My knees were weakened (through fasting)* etc.; *Judith 8: Let us humble our souls to them in spirit* etc.

Again, it can be said when humility is a companion of fasting; because when humility is not joined to fasting, that fasting is not accepted by God - *Isaiah 58: Why have we fasted, and you have not regarded* etc. However, when humility is joined to fasting, that sort of fasting is pleasing to God. And thus he says, *I humbled (my soul) in fasting.*

But since nothing is able to humble the flesh unless it strikes against and strengthens the spirit, the enemy is to be weakened, and the fighter to be strengthened. But the spirit is stregthened through prayer; thus, he adds, *And my prayer was turned into my bosom - Tobias 12: Prayer is good with fasting.*

Prayer is a particular help in tribulation - *James 5: Is any of you sad? Let him pray and sing psalms with a right soul; Psalm 76: My soul refused to be consoled, remembering* etc.

But he says, *It was turned into my bosom.* If this is taken with respect to Christ, it is understood in a two-fold way. In one way, so that it is referred to God whom he adores, to the Father in whose bosom he was - *John 1: the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father.* In another way, so that it is referred to those for whom he was praying, because he was praying for these which were in the bosom of Christ.

However, the bosom of Christ is God's mystery, and this is the aim of predestination: and so he used to pray on behalf of their predestination - *John 17: I pray for them, not for the world.* However, if it is referred to a just person who prays for another, he does not always obtain on his behalf - *Jeremiah 7: Therefore do not pray for this people* etc., namely, because his sins do not deserve to be listened to. Nevertheless, he is listened to on his own behalf, when his prayer is proved deserving; and so, *Into my bosom,* that is, to the very bosom in me - *Matthew 10: Your peace shall return to you.*

It is true that the aforesaid are useful; nevertheless they have little power unless someone has a devout desire for his neighbour; and thus he adds, *As a neighbour.*

A desire for one's neighbour is shown in two ways, namely in one's pleasure at another's good, and in one's displeasure at another's evil - *Romans 12: Rejoice with those who rejoice, and weep with those who weep.* The first he indicates when he says, *As a neighbour,* the second, when he adds, *As one mourning.*

Therefore, with respect to the first, he says, *As a neighbour.* This construction is extraordinary because these accusatives do not hold, and therefore are governed. The Gloss states that, *One case is set forth instead of another,* namely the accusative instead of the ablative; as if he were saying, Thus I was greatly pleased in these, just as in a neighbour and a brother.

Or, according to Jerome, it concerns this one word *to:* Jerome thus has, *Somewhat like to a friend and my brother*

Or, it is meant, *As if I was thus greatly pleasing,* to God, directing me to them, as to neighbours and brothers; for the Jews were neighbours to Christ because he used to converse with them - *Baruch 3:Afterwards he was seen upon earth, and conversed with men.* They became his brother through lineage - *Romans 9: Of whom Christ, according to the flesh; John 4: Salvation is of the Jews.* But *Job 30: I was the brother of dragons, and companion of ostriches.*

With respect to the second, namely one's displeasure at another's evil, he says, *As one mourning* etc. This most especially pertains to Christ at *Luke 19,* when he wept over the city.

And he says, *One mourning.* Mourning is a wailing for the dead. At that time, therefore, a man weeps for others, when he laments their evils, which they themselves do not feel being deceased. Sinners indeed have died in their sins, nor do they feel their own evils; but the just grieve from compassion - *Jeremiah 9: Who will give water to my head* etc.

Sometimes, one also grieves on behalf of another's evil, which he himself now feels. And this is to be saddened. Jerome thus has a more beautiful translation, *As a mourning dejected mother, I was reduced,* namely over these; as if he were saying, I grieved over these, just as if I were their mother.

I thus showed them this sanctity of desire through which they ought to have been converted, but instead they were even more determined; because *They rejoiced against me and came together.*

Concerning this he does two things. First he describes their malice, and second, his own patience, at, *And I did not know.* Concerning the first he does three things, that is to say, he describes three things which happened during Christ's passion. First is described the Jews' enjoyment in evil, second, their consent to evil, at, *And they came together,* and third, Christ's severe suffering, at, *Were brought together* etc.

Therefore, he says, *They rejoiced against me,* by being insolent during my death - *Lamentations 1: All of my enemies have heard of my evil. They have rejoiced* etc.

The contrary is declared at *Proverbs 24: When your enemy falls, do not be glad* etc.

*And they came together* etc. Behold their consent to evil. For the leaders came together in the death of Christ, mutually with the plebs and the Jewish people - *Psalm 2: The kings of the earth stood up, and the princes met together.*

*And scourges were brought together upon me.* Behold the severe suffering of Christ: because he was slaughtered by the Jews and the Gentiles - *Lamentations 1: For my sighs are many* etc. In the Hebrew version, it is rendered, *Flagellators were brought together upon me.*

Then when he says, *I did not know,* Christ's patience is shown: because, *I did not know,* that is, according to the manner I had of not knowing, namely by being silent and not speaking - *Psalm 37: But I, as a deaf man, heard not,* etc. *Isaiah 53: He shall be lead as a sheep to the slaughter* etc. *Jeremiah 11: And I was as a meek lamb, that is carried to be a victim: and I knew not* etc.

Or, *I did not know,* according to their opinion: because I seemed to them not to know their plans.

Another translation has, *They did not know.* For three things were unknown to them, namely, who they were whipping, because if they knew, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory - *1. Cor. 2.*

Second, the reason why - *John 18: If I have spoken evil, give testimony of the evil; but if well, why do you strike me?*

Third, the effect of their sin: for on account of this they are perpetually deprived - *Luke 21: And thus upon this people*

Second, when he says, *They were dissipated and felt no remorse,* he shows that they are not called back, nor changed with regard to good by means of that assistance which is divine punishment. And concerning this he does three things. First, he shows the evil which they were suffering, second, their lack of remorse, at, *They knew no remorse,* and third, the effect of their persistence, at, *They tempted me* etc.

Therefore, he says, *They were dissipated.* This is explained in a two-fold way. First, in this way; *They were dissipated,* that is, they were deadened in their hearts, while they did not know the reason of those things that happened, that is, of the miracles during the passion - because *Matthew 27* states that, *Many bodies of the saints, that were asleep, arose: and coming out of their tombs, they came into the holy city and appeared to many people. The sun was beclouded* etc. *Thus, those returning were beating their breasts.*

Or, *They were dissipated,* that is, divided - because *John 7* states, *For some were saying, He is a good man, but other were saying, No, on the contrary, he seduces the people. And they felt no remorse,* that is, were not turned to penance. And this is clear by the result, because they tempted me saying, at *John 10: If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.*

Or, they were not converted to the passion of Christ. For after his death, they were still insulting him, speaking words of blasphemy against Christ, because they were speaking words of derision - *Matthew 27: Oh, you who destroys the temple of God* etc.

And with respect to this he says, *They mocked me.* Mockery is derision which is made with a wrinkled nose - *Isaiah 37: Whom have you reproached, and whom have you blasphemed, and against whom have you exalted your voice* etc.

Again, words of indignation - *Matthew 27: We have remembered what this seducer said while he was still living.* And with respect to this he says, *They gnashed* etc. This is of wild boars which are cruel, and thus of the Jews *- Lamentations 2: They have gnashed with their teeth, and have said, We will swallow her up.*

Previously, the Psalmist, in the person of Christ or the just, showed the wickedness and the obstinacy of his persecutors. But here, he invokes God against both.

First, he prays for divine help, and second, he shows the fruit of this help, at, *I will give thanks.* Concerning the first he does two things. First, he prays for a hastening, and second, the help itself, at *Restore.*

Therefore, he says, *O Lord, when will you regard me?* In these words he thus elicits a hastening of help and the desire of a soul not being able to suffer further delay, as if having been placed in distress. For this reason, he says, *O Lord, when will you regard me?* For this is proper to one not tolerating delay - *Psalm 41: When shall I come and appear before the face of the Lord?*

This can be understood in two ways, insofar as this two-fold way is referred to God. The first is to his mercy with respect to the salvation of the just - *Wisdom 4: The grace of God and his mercy upon his holy ones, and his regard upon his choosen.*

The second is with respect to the punishment of the wicked - *Judith 9: Look upon the camp of the Assyrians now as you were pleased to look upon the camp of the Egyptians, when they pursued, armed, after your servants.*

And they can be understood in both respects if they are explained concerning Christ - *O Lord, when will you regard,* me, to restore me. *Regard me and hear me, O Lord my God. Illumine my eyes, so that I never fall asleep in death, ever my enemy says, "I prevailed against him".*

Or, *When will you regard,* my opponents - *Habacuc 1: Why do you regard iniquities, or those acting iniquitously, and remain silent when the impious devours the one who is more just than himself?*

Then when he says, *Restore,* he explains that very help for which he prays. And in this petition he gives two things to understand, namely the necessity which he was suffering, and the malice of his opponents, at, *From their malice.*

Therefore with respect to the first, he says, *Restore,* because the necessity is great, for it is a dangerous situation since he is in peril of his soul. *Restore,* I say, my soul, namely to my body from which it has become separated in death, even though it has not become separated from God - *John 10: I have the power of laying down my soul* etc.

He was capable of this by the divine power, which is not other than the Father's power: so in this way he does through himself whatever he does, which nevertheless he has from the Father.

Every just person also says this when he is in danger, either corporeal or spiritual; as if he were saying, Free me from danger.

The enemys' malice is two-fold. First, with respect to their deceit: and so he says, *From their malice,* because they procede wickedly against me - *(?): You conquered the wicked.*

Second, with respect to their cruelty, *And my only soul from the lions,* because only the soul is freed from the lions, that is from demons and tyranny - *Psalm 56: He has delivered my soul from the midst of the young lions; Ecclesiasticus 51.: From the roaring of those prepared to devour food.*

Here he discusses help's fruit, first, on the part of himself, second, on the part of the enemy, at, *Do not let them rejoice over me,* and third, on the part of the just, at, *Let them rejoice.*

The fruit on the part of those freed is praise of God; and so he says, *I will give thanks to you, and praise you, because you have freed me - Psalm. 65: I will pay my vows to you* etc.

And if this is referred to Christ, the fruit of Christ's resurrection is the instruction of the Church, and the faith by which the Church confesses God - *Romans 10: With the heart we believe unto justice, with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.*

Or, the Church is represented first through the multitude of believers, and second, through their virtue.

With respect to the first, he says, *In the great church,* indeed in its number and its spreading out over the nations - *Malachi 1: Great is your name among the gentiles.*

Again, in great constancy and strength, because the gates of hell will not prevail against her, as is said at *Matthew 16; Psalm 39: I have declared your justice in the great church.*

With respect to the second, he says, *I will praise you to a heavy people.* Heaviness is sometimes taken in a good or bad sense, because similarly there is a two-fold property to corporeal heaviness.

The first property is that of weightiness, which aims downwards, and this is bad, since a person is called heavy insofar as he aims for the weightiness and likeness of earth - *Psalm 4: The sons of men always heavy of heart? Isaiah 1:...a people heavy with iniquity, a vile seed, vicious children...*

The other property is firmness, which is opposed to lightness, and is not moved. A person is called light who is moved by every wind - *?: He who is firm in good is called heavy; 2. Cor. 10: (For his) letters (indeed, they say,) are weighty and strong.* Jerome has *I will praise you among a strong people.*

*Do not let my enemies rejoice over me.* Here, the Psalmist describes the fruit on the part of the enemy, where he prays that their exultation be restrained. First, he sets forth the fruit, second, he describes the basis of their insolence, at, *Those who are opposed,* and third, the excitement of this basis, at, *You have seen, O Lord.*

Therefore, he says, *Do not let them rejoice over (me),* as if he were saying, I pray that I be restored, *so that they may not rejoice over me,* as if overcoming me. And this because when Christ was resurrected, their joy was turned into confusion.

Or, *Do not let them rejoice over me,* in my members, which are not heavy, because they are supported through Christ - *Mich. 7: Do not rejoice over me, my enemy.*

*Those who are opposed.* Here he determines the cause of their insolence. This cause or basis is three-fold, namely on the part of their heart, work, and mouth.

On the part of their work, *Those who are wrongly opposed, rejoice.* If they were opposed and rejoiced for the sake of justice, this would be good and just. But because they rejoice wrongly, it is inappropriate - *Psalm 35: He has devised iniquity upon his bed.*

On the part of their heart is undeserved hatred. Thus he says, *And those who have freely hated me,* that is, without cause - *Psalm 119: When I spoke to them, they freely fought against me; John 15:...that the word may be fulfilled, which was written in their law, "They hated me freely"; Psalm 34: They were repaying evil for good.*

Again, assuming hatred, because with the heart's hatred, *They wink their eyes.* This is two-fold. In one way, to show the aspect of hatred, as it were, assenting to what they esteemed.

Or, they were assenting among themselves with their eyes, exciting themselves to evil - *Proverbs 6: A man that is an apostate, an unprofitable man*

On the part of their mouth, in a two-fold way. First, with respect to fraudulent words, and second, with respect to mockery.

With respect to the first, he says, what is in their mouth, and second, what is in their heart; *In their mouth, words of peace.* Thus he says, *For indeed they spoke peaceably to me - Matthew 22: We know that you are speaking truly; Psalm 27: They speak peace with their neighbour, but evils are in their hearts.*

In their heart they had guile, that is, deceitful words - *Jerome 9: Wounding arrows their tongues, he spoke an evil intent.* And this, *in the earth's anger, they devised plots,* that is, having anger against me on behalf of the world - *John 11: Lest perhaps the Romans come* etc. Jerome has, *In the earth's plunder, derisive words.*

He who mocks another does two things, that they molest the derided one with words of this kind *,* and mocking, they cheer. Thus he says, *They opened wide their mouth against me,* as if they spoke evil of another boldly and joyfully - *Isaiah 37:...against whom have you exalted your voice, and lifted up your eyes on high?*

*They opened wide their mouth against me.* He shows their joy when they say, *Well done,* an interjection of congratulations - *Matthew 25: Well done good servant* etc., as if he were saying, They are congratulating themselves concerning the victory which they consider themselves to have over me. And this because, *My eyes have seen,* namely Christ's passion which they had desired - *Matthew 27: Oh, you who destroys God's temple* etc.; *?: This is the day for which we were waiting, we discover, we see.*

Previously, the Psalmist described the basis of their insolence, which was their malice. Here, however, he removes that basis, or cause, invoking God's judgement,

concerning which he proposes three things. First, the knowledge necessary for judgement to have proceded, second, he prays for judgement, at, *Be not silent,* and third, the effect of judgement, at, *Let them not say.*

A judge cannot justly pass sentence unless informed previously concerning the deed. This, however, is not wanting in divine judgement, because he sees those thing which are done on both sides. Thus he says, *You have seen*, namely their malice, and my uprightness - *Hebrews 4: All things are naked and open to his eyes.*

Thereupon he prays for divine judgement. First, he acts concerning the delaying of judgement, and second, prays for its advancement.

That judgement is delayed, derives from two factors, namely by reason of the suffering of the one enduring the failings of the wicked *,* and that the judge does not care for him, on behalf of whom the sentence ought to be rendered, for which reason he rejects him.

With respect to the first he says, *Be not silent,* that is to say, concerning their malice, which you have seen in its taking place - *Habacuc 1: Why do you look upon those who despise you, and remain silent when the impious treads under foot the one who is more just than himself?*

With respect to the second he says, *Do not depart from me,* as it were by not rendering aid in necessity - *Hosea 9: Woe to them when I shall depart from them.*

Here he describes the advancement of judgement. Three things are required in a judgement. First, that the judge understands what it to be judged, second, that he consider the merits of the affair, and third, that he produce a just sentence.

With respect to the first he says, *Rise up,* that is from slugishness, and assume the mind of one judging - *Psalm 43: Rise up, why do you sleep, O Lord.*

With respect to the second he says two things, to which the judge ought to aspire, namely the giving of judgment, and to deliver a sentence upon the affair; and so he says, *Aspire to my judgement,* that is, by delivering (it) on my behalf *: Psalm 71: O God, give your judgement to the king* etc.

With respect to the second he says, *My God and my Lord, in my cause.* In one way, *In my lawsuit: Job 29: The cause which I did not know, I searched out most diligently.*

Or, *In cause,* insofar as cause is the same as a principle, from which another thing follows; as if he were saying, *Aspire to the cause,* on behalf of which I myself am suffering. And this is obedience to the Father - *Philipians 2: Becoming obedient unto death* etc.

Again, the cause is the love which he had for us, on account of which cause he suffered.

With respect to the second he says, *Judge me.* One version has, *According to your justice;* another one has, *Judge me according to my justice,* the same as the first, as if he had said, *Judge me,* according to your law and justice. For the justice of God is to render to anyone according to his merits, which cannot be deceived and turned from the truth, according to *Romans 2.* The judgement of God is according to truth.

*According to my justice,* namely which I myself followed. And it can be said that my justice and your justice are the same, namely of God justifying, and of man justifed, as it were, because our justice is from God - *Romans 10: Seeking to establish their own justice* etc.

Whereupon he prays for the effect of judgment, *so that they may not rejoice over me:* and concerning this he does two things. First, he prays for the censure of insolence, and second, for their shame, at *Let them blush.*

External exultation arises from interior joy. Therefore, he prays first that their joy within, and second that their external insolence, be restrained.

Therefore, with respect to the first, he says, *Let them not rejoice over me;* as if he were saying, Restrain them thus in your judgement, so that they do not rejoice over me - *Lamentations 1: All my enemies have heard of my evil, and have rejoiced.*

With respect to the second he says, *Let them not say in their hearts.* Insolence comes to be in two ways, as it does with joy. Joy is either of a present good, or of a future good. Likewise with insolence, it is either because of evils already done, or to be done.

Therefore, he first prays that insolence concerning things done in the past be removed. And so he says, *Let them not say in their hearts, Well done, well done it is to our mind,* that is, let not his soul be pleased over matters concerning me, *and let them not say, "We will swallow him up".*

Sometimes one oppresses another not by exaltation, but by theft by reason of weakeness. And this is evident when he immediately repents. But when he oppresses by reason of malice, then he rejoices at having done this for himself. And this is what he says, *Let them not say, We will swallow him up,* namely in the future - *Psalm 56: Their tongue a sharp sword; Habacuc 3: Their exaltation was like that of him that devoureth the poor man in secret.*

Here he prays for their confusion and two things in correspondence with two mentioned previously concerning which insolence arises, namely, from deeds performed and to be done. He prays, first, so that they may be confounded concerning the evil they have already done, and second, so that they may be confounded over future deeds, at, *Let them be clothed in confusion.*

Therefore he first prays for their shame, either a good confusion, or an eternal one. And he says this by way of the mode of something foretold, or of conformity to God - *Isaiah 65: My servants shall rejoice, and you shall be confounded.*

He prays, secondly, for their unbelief or fear. Hence, *And let them be ashamed at the same time.*

Or in good, as if they are beginning to fear God. For fear, in the beginning and properly pious, is called reverance. And this fear begins in salvation, because, as it is said at *Eccleiasticus 1: The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.*

Or, that they always be in fear - *Wisdom 17: Since wickedness is fearful, it gives witness having been condemned; Job 15: The sound of terror is always in his ears.* Why these things happen to them is because they rejoice in my misfortunes. Consequently, he prays for their confusion concerning future deeds, and he prays for something by means of another mode, because confusion is the same as shame. And just as those can be taken with respect to good and evil, so too can confusion and reverence.

But because *Let them be clothed in confusion* is added, he adds something else. For clothing signifies a habit. Therefore, the one who fears in the beginning and in a simple way, cannot be said to have the habit of fear; but rather those who are hardened in their evil, and desire it - *Jeremiah 17:...with a double crushing break them.*

Why he prays in this way that they be more afflicted than before is because of greater blame, as if, namely, they have not been satisfied by those things which they have done, but still plan wicked things against me.

It is just like the Jews, after Christ's death, wanting to conceal his resurrection by bribing the guards - *Proverbs 30: Keep wicked and vain speach, and lying words far from me.* Jerome has, *Those who are speaking wicked things* against me - *1 Kings 2: Do not multipy to speak lofty things boasting.*

Here is the third fruit, which arises on the part of divine aid. And this fruit is the joy of the holy ones. First he discusses the fruit of exaltation saying, *Let them exult and be glad.*

However, he discusses delight instead of the fruit of the holy ones because gladness means a breadth of heart, whence it signifies an interior joy - *Psalm 118: You have enlarged my heart.* And this gladness is proper to the just - *Psalm 96: Light is risen to the just, and joy to the right of heart.*

Exaltation speaks of joy bursting forth from within. And this exaltation belongs to the just - *Psalm 32: Exalt, O you just, in the Lord.* And this belongs to the upright, whence he says, *Those who desire my justice,* namely, to imitate it.

Or, if this is said from the person of David, *They desire my justice*, that is, they rejoice together in my goods; thus is joy of the heart, from which follows exultation of the mouth - *Isaiah 51: Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of praise.* And thus he adds, *And let them always say, Let the Lord be magnified,* that is, Let the holy ones magnify the Lord.

Not by making him great according to truth, but by proclaiming and speaking about him - *Psalm 33: Magnify the Lord with me* etc. *Ecclesiasticus 43: His magnificence is wonderful.*

Again *Ecclesiasticus 43: Who shall magnify him as he is...? And who are those who do this?* Surely, *Those who desire the peace of his servant,* namely, Christ according to his human nature: which peace Christ made and gives, because *He himself is our peace, who made both one - Ephesians 2; Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you - John 14; (These things I have spoken to you) that in me you may have peace - John 16.*

If however what was said is understood concerning the person of David, the sense is thus; *Those who desire the peace of his servant,* that is, let those exalt and be glad who desire that his servant, namely me, will have peace.

*And my tongue.* Here he shows that even he is taking part in this joy; it is as if he were saying, Not only those who have joy, but even I am taking part in the joy of the holy ones.

And concerning this he does two things. First, he describes interior meditation, and second, interior praise.

Therefore with respect to the first he says, *And my tongue shall meditate your justice.*

But on the contrary, to meditate does not pertain to the tongue, but rather to the heart.

There is a three-fold response. In one way, the tongue meditates, that is, what has been meditated is spoken - *Psalm 48: My tongue will speak wisdom,* namely that which has been meditated. He who is just, speaks out of a premeditation, as do the wise.

In another way, the mouth or speech is twofold, namely interior and exterior - *Matthew 14: Whatever procedes from the mouth,* that is, the heart, *these are what condemn a man.* And in this way is this tongue taken, namely interior.

The third mode, thus *It will meditate,* that is it will keep singing, and accompany, *your praise the whole day long,* that is, it will always think of how it will praise you - *Psalm 33: I will bless the Lord at all times* etc.
