# Section 1 — Psalm 35

**[Unto the end, for the servant of God, David himself] The unjust hath said within himself, that he would sin: there is no fear of God before his eyes. For in his sight he hath done deceitfully, that his iniquity may be found unto hatred. The words of his mouth are iniquity and guile: he would not understand that he might do well. He hath devised iniquity on his bed, he hath set himself on every way that is not good: but evil he hath not hated.**

**O Lord, thy mercy is in heaven, and thy truth reacheth, even to the clouds. Thy justice is as the mountains of God, thy judgments are a great deep.**

**Men and beasts thou wilt preserve, O Lord: O how hast thou multiplied thy mercy, O God!**

**But the children of men shall put their trust under the covert of thy wings. They shall be inebriated with the plenty of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of the torrent of thy pleasure. For with thee is the fountain of life;**

**and in thy light we shall see light.**

**Extend thy mercy to them that know thee, and thy justice to them that are right in heart. Let not the foot of pride come to me, and let not the hand of the sinner move me.**

**There the workers of iniquity are fallen, they are cast out, and could not stand.**

a. In the preceding Psalm, the Psalmist implored God's aid against the persecutions by sinners; here, however, he describes the wickedness of sinners. The title is *Unto the end, for the servant of God*. And this is something new, that he says, *For the servant of God*. That person is a servant of God who does not lay claim for himself the goods of his Lord, and who does not ascribe his evils to the Lord.

For there are some who ascribe their sins to God, saying that they sin of necessity; and they appropriate their goods to themselves, saying that they have them from their own power. David does the opposite: and regarding this, he does two things.

First he makes mention of the evils that are in us from our agency. Second, the goods that are in us from God's agency, at, *O Lord, thy mercy is in heaven*.

Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he sets down the root of evil. Second he sets down the progress of evil from that root, at, *The words of his mouth*. The root of evil is the intention.

First, therefore, he sets down the evil intention. Second, he sets down the cause, at, *There is no fear*. Third he demonstrates it, at, *For in his sight he hath done deceitfully*. As Aristotle says in Book 3 of the *Ethics*, *Here someone does something injust, but does not act injustly; another does [something injust] and acts injustly; another does [something injust] and acts [injustly], and is injust*.

One does the first when one holds back something belonging to another which he thinks to be his own. One does the second when one, not because of a habit, but from a passion does something unjust, and when this passion leaves off, he gives back the other's thing. One does the third when one does something unjust from an intention. And so he says, *The unjust hath said*, that is, he has deliberated from the intention, so that [through his own agency] he comes to be deficient in his very own self: for intending to sin is within his power, and not in the decree of the stars. *Sirach 15: God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his own counsel.* But, because the impediment to sin is removed, the progression of sinning cannot be restrained.

But it is said that sin is against the Holy Spirit, when one sins by clear malice; and this when the impediment is removed. And then, this impediment removes the fear of the Lord. *Proverbs 16: By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil*; *Job 15: As much as is in thee, thou hast made void fear, and hast taken away prayers from before God.*

And, so he says, *There is no fear of God before his eyes*. Fear is in the faculty of appetite; but the cause of fear is in the eyes, because they do not reflect upon the judgement of God. *Daniel 13:* *They...turned away their eyes that they might not look unto heaven*. But the cause is *For in his sight he hath done deceitfully*.

When somebody in the eyes of the king does something hateful to the king, it is a sign that he does not fear him; and thus when a sinner does a sin in the presence of God, who sees everything, it is a sign that he does not fear God, because in his face, namely God's, *He hath done deceitfully*, that is, he has done something deceitful. *Hebrews 4:* *But all things are naked and open to his eyes*.

And he says, *Deceitfully*, because he brings forth one thing and dissimulates another: *Psalm 5: The bloody and the deceitful man the Lord will abhor; Job 36: Dissemblers and crafty men prove the wrath of God*. And thus, *That his iniquity may be found unto hatred*, that is, such is his iniquity that God would hate him. And this is a sign that God hates such simulators, that in the Gospels, God inveighs against simulators.

Another version has, *In his face, that he sees his iniquity, and hates*. It happens that somebody examines his conscience, so that he discovers his iniquity and hates. Frequently in this he acts fraudulently, because he does not examine [matters] well but makes light of the serious and makes light matters serious.

And therefore he says, *For in his sight he hath done deceitfully*, that is in his conscience; for if he faithfully hated his iniquity, he would have examined it. Or according to the same sense, *In his sight*, namely God's, that is, in holy Scripture, which they do not consider with respect to its truth, and that of the Holy Spirit, but they do things deceitfully. And they do things deceitfully then because they do not discover their iniquity [by examination of conscience or by faithful attention to Scripture].

And consequently, he sets down the progress [of evil] from the root. And first he sets down the sin in word. Second of sin in mind and in deed. A person commits a sin in word in two ways; either by public wickedness, when one lies publicly, and this is what he says at, *The words of his mouth are iniquity*. *Job 6: And you shall not find iniquity in my tongue*. Or by a hidden fraudulence, and this is *Guile*. *Jeremias 9: Their tongue is a piercing arrow, it hath spoken deceit*.

One sins in mind in two ways: by contempt for the good and by the zeal for evil. It happens that one person sins by weakness, another by ignorance. But when it is an affected ignorance, then this is a serious sin. *Job 21: We desire not the knowledge of thy ways*.

And thus he says, *He would not understand that he might do well*, whence he willed to understand things motivated by curiosity, but not so that he did things well. *Jeremias 4: They are wise to do evil.* And likewise sometimes a person does a sin out of zeal for evil, and so he says, *He hath devised iniquity on his bed*, that is, in his mind. Or, *On his bed*, that is, when one remains in his secret. *Proverbs 24:* *The thought of a fool is sin: and the detractor is the abomination of men*.

*He hath set himself*. Here he sets down that he is committed by his word. And first he sets down his assistance to evil. Second, that he does not hinder evil. As to the first he says, *He hath set himself on every way that is not good*, that is he lives and favors everything of the evil path, or the working of evil. *Psalm 2: The kings of the earth stood up*.

As to the second he says, *But evil he hath not hated.* *Psalm 51: Thou hast loved malice more than goodness. Job 20: For when evil shall be sweet in his mouth, he will hide it under his tongue*.

b. *O Lord*. Here he shows what he has received from God. And first he numbers the goods themselves. Second he asks that they may be given to him, at, *Extend*.

Regarding the first, he does two things. First he sets forth the cause of the good things that he has received from God. Second, he enumerates these good things themselves at *Men and beasts*.

And first he sets down the praise of the cause. Second he sets forth the depth of the effects, at, *Thy justice*. Whatever God does in us is either from justice, or from mercy, or from truth.

Out of justice, when he renders for merit. Out of truth when he renders what he promised. And out of mercy when he exceeds what is merited or promised.

Let us examine these three. The justice of God is high, because nobody merits that God should give him more. Truth is higher, for God promises and fulfills things that we never have deserved, such as the Incarnation, and other things that pertain to the mystery of redemption. But mercy is the highest: for those things that we cannot think, are bestowed liberally. *1 Corinthians 1*: *That eye hath not seen*.

And so one compares justice to mountains, truth to clouds, which are higher, and mercy to the heavens, which is above all. He says, *O Lord, thy mercy is in heaven*, [for] that which is the cause of all of my goods is in heaven. *Psalm 144: And his tender mercies are over all his works*. *Isaias 63: I will remember the tender mercies of the Lord*.

*And thy truth reacheth, even to the clouds.* *Thy justice is as the mountains of God*. All of these are said following from their effects, for with respect to their essence, they are the same. In a mystical sense, by these three are understood the just, for in these very just people justice, truth and mercy are found.

The just are signified by heaven with respect to recompense and charity. *Matthew 5: Your reward is very great in heaven.* Likewise in those people mercy shines to the greatest degree, for they are every way liberated from all troubles. We however, at present, are in adversities.

By clouds are understood the doctors. *Isaias 5: I will command the clouds to rain no rain upon it.* And in them the truth shines, which they make apparent. And by mountains are understood holy men.

And what follows from all of these things? That these judgements are *A great deep*, that is an incomprehensible one. *Romans 11: How incomprehensible are his judgments*.

c. *Men*. Above the Psalmist wrote of God's justice, truth, and mercy, and his judgements, from which good things come to us; but here, he enumerates these goods: and regarding this he does two things. First he writes of the goods that are bestowed in common to every creature. Second the goods proper to the rational creature which He confers, at, *The children of men*.

Regarding the first he does two things. First, he writes of those things that, in common, come from God. Second, he speaks up in admiration of the divine mercy, at, *O how hast thou multiplied thy mercy*. Thus, I say, that thy mercy is great, and that by it you save men and beasts, that is rational and irrational creatures.

Or, by *Men* is understood the just, and by *Beasts* is understood those very sinners who are saved by God by rescue in this life. *Matthew 5: And raineth upon the just and the unjust; Psalm 48: And man when he was in honour did not understand.*

And this common salvation is for all in two ways: namely in the salvation of the body. *Sirach 30: There is no riches above the riches of the health of the body*. And in the provision of things. *4 Kings 6: "Save me, my lord O king". And he said: "If the Lord doth not save thee, how can I save thee? Out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress?"*

Consequently, he marvels at the divine mercy, at, *O how hast thou multiplied*. Namely, how much *Hast thou multiplied thy mercy*, namely that you save not only men, but even beasts. Or that you not only have care for the just, but also even for sinners, insofar as you multiply the temporal goods that are in them: Jerome has, *How costly*, etc. For, God's mercy is great, that saves all: great indeed, because he gives to each more than he merits. *Psalm 85: For thy mercy is great towards me*.

d. *But the children*. Here he sets down spiritual goods, which are three: confidence, spiritual restoration, and intellectual knowledge: and these respond to the grades of beings. For of beings, some simply are, some are and live, and some in addition to this understand; and among beings, the rational creature participates in a certain kind of eternity, for the rational soul does not perish.

And therefore he says, *The children of men*, that is, the children of the Christ of God; or *The children of men* is understood to be all people in general. They *put their trust under the covert of thy wings*. And he speaks metaphorically. For the hen protects her chicks by her wings lest they be killed; in like wise God himself protects a rational creature by a spiritual protection lest he or she weaken particularly in his or her soul. *Matthew 23: How often would I have gathered together thy children; Isaias 49: In the shadow of his hand he hath protected me*.

Or, *Under the covert*, that is in spiritual protection. And so the two wings are the teachings of the New and the Old Testament. Likewise, those that live here below heaven, are fed by a special restoration. And first he sets down this restoration. Second, he sets down its cause, at, *With thee*.

Spiritual restoration consists in two things: namely in God's gifts, and in His sweetness. As to the first, he says, *They shall be inebriated with the plenty of thy house*. The house is the Church. *1 Timothy 3: That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God*.

And this house, which in one sense is in the world, and in another [spiritual] sense in heaven. *Psalm 121: We shall go into the house of the Lord*. In both of these is the plenty of God's gifts; but in this Church, it is not yet brought to fulfillment, but in the other, there is a most perfect abundance of all goods, and spiritual men are sated by this. *Psalm 64: We shall be filled with the good things of thy house*.

And what is more, *They shall be inebriated*, insofar as they will be filled above all measure of merit with what they desire; for drunkenness is a sort of excess. *Isaias 64: The eye hath not seen*; *Song of Songs 5: And be inebriated, my dearly beloved*.

And those who are drunk are not in full control of their faculties, but out of their own control. So, those who have been filled by spiritual charisms, their entire intention is borne towards God. *Phillipians 3: But our conversation is in heaven.* And not only are they restored by gifts, but even by the love for God. *Job 22: Then shalt thou abound in delights in the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face to God*.

And thus he says with respect to the second, *And thou shalt make them drink of the torrent of thy pleasure*. This is the love of the Holy Spirit, which makes an impetus in the soul, like a torrent. *Isaias 59: When he shall come as a violent stream, which the spirit of the Lord driveth on*.

And this seems to be *Of [your] pleasure*, because [the Holy Sprit] produces pleasure and sweetness in the soul. *Wisdom 12: O how good and sweet is thy spirit, O Lord, in all things*. And the good drink of this drink. *1 Corinthians 20: All drank the same spiritual drink.*

Or, The torrent of thy pleasure, namely, of God, which is said to be a torrent. *Proverbs 18: The fountain of wisdom as an overflowing stream*. For His will is so efficacious that none can resist it, as none can resist a torrent. *Romans 9: For who resisteth his will?*

But the material basis of a restoration of this kind is that they are connected to the fountain: and just as those who would hold their mouths to a fountain of wine would become inebriated, so, those who hold their mouth, that is, their desire, to the fountain of life and sweetness, are inebriated. *1 Corinthians 11: And one indeed is hungry and another is drunk*.

And so they are inebriated, because, *For with thee is the fountain of life*. If this be referred to Christ, then the meaning of *With thee*, etc. is: you are *The fountain of life*.

If this be referred to the Father, then the meaning of *With thee is the fountain of life* is: Your word giving life to all is *With thee*. *John 1: The Word was with God; Jeremias 2: They have forsaken me, the fountain of living water.*

Who truly is the *Fountain of life*, that is, of spiritual goods, from which all are given life. Second is intellectual knowledge, which humans, or rational creatures, participate in. Thus he says,

e. *And in thy light*. There are two privileges that belong to a rational creature. One, that a rational creature sees in the light of God, and because other animals do not see in the light of God, he says, *In thy light*. This is not understood to be the light created by God, because what is understood by this is the light that *Genesis 1* speaks about at, *Be light made*.

But, *In thy light*, namely that by which you shine, which is the resemblance to your substance. Brute animals do not participate in this light; but a rational animal first participates in it in natural knowledge; for the natural reason of a person is nothing other than the reflected gleam of divine clarity in the soul: and the [condition of being] "after the image of God" is on account of this clarity. *Psalm 4: The light of thy countenance O Lord, is signed upon us*.

The second is the light of grace. *Ephesians 5: Rise thou that sleepest* etc. The third is the light of glory. *Isaias 60: Arise, be enlightened, O Jerusalem: for thy light is come* etc. Or, *In thy light*, that is, in Christ, who is the light of light: and so is the light that is the true God.

For Christ is light, insofar as he proceeds from the Father. And he is the *Fountain of life*, insofar as he is the principle of the life-giving Spirit.

The other privilege is that only a rational creature sees this light: whence he says, *We shall see light*. This light is either created truth, that is Christ, with respect to his human nature; or it is uncreated truth, by which we recognize and come to know other true things.

For spiritual light is truth: for just as by light something is known as it is illuminated; so it is known in so far as it is true. Brute animals know well some true things, for instance, "this is sweet": but not the truth of this proposition, "this is true": because this consists in the adequation of one's intellect to a thing, which brutes cannot effect.

Therefore, brutes do not have the created light. And likewise, they do not have the uncreated light, for only humans are made for knowing God by faith and by hope; and just as we see now in light by faith, we will see Him as He is, when we are in the kingdom.

f. *Extend thy mercy*. Here he turns himself to prayer, and asks for God's mercy. And first he makes a petition with respect to others. Second with respect to himself, at *Let not the foot of pride come to me*.

He asks for two things, in accordance with the two main types of humans that live in the house of the Lord. For some know God by faith, and others who are justified cling to him.

Those who do not know God, are not in His house; but those who have faith can still be subjected to sin, and so he asks for mercy for them; thus he says, O Lord, *To them that know thee*, namely, by faith, and he calls knowledge science because of firmly determined mutual indwelling: *Extend* to them, that is, more abundantly, *Extend thy mercy* to them by having mercy towards their sins. *Isaias 27: For it is not a wise people.* *Jeremias 9: But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me*.

But, *To them that are right in heart*, that is, those who have a right heart, and who are strengthened in You by charity, *Extend* to them, that is, justice more abundantly, that is, the crown they have earned, because these very people earn the crown now. *2 Timothy 4: As to the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice.* And so he asks for just things for them.

He asks two things for himself. First he asks to be preserved from sin, and this by the removing of two causes of sin. One is interior: and this is pride, which is the beginning of all sin: whence he says, *Let not the foot* *of pride come to me*, that is let the appetitive disposition to being prideful be removed from me. *Sirach 23: Give me not haughtiness of my eyes.*

The other cause is exterior, when he is incited by another to sinning. *Psalm 18: And from those [sins] of others spare thy servant.* So he says, *Let not the hand of the sinner move me*, that is let not the inducements and promises and blandishments lead me into sinning.

g. *There the workers of iniquity are fallen*. Here he sets forth the reason for his petition: and this is twofold, because a fall is on account of the foot: just as when one falls because of a foot that has something bad in it. And thus he says, *There*, that is, in the foot of pride, *Are fallen*.

Behold: *Pride is the beginning of all sin. Sirach 10:* For a person sins from this, on account of what is not supported under the rule of divine law. But arrogance comes from pride. *1 Corinthians 10: Wherefore he that thinketh himself to stand*, that is, through pride, *Let him take heed lest he fall*.

And he says, *The workers of iniquity*, not "those who worked iniquity", because sometimes somebody sins out of weakness or ignorance, and this person does not remain in sin; but who sins out of pride, persists in it: because, *Proverbs 2: Who are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in most wicked things.*

Still, another cause is expulsion by another; whence he says, *They are cast out*, that is, expelled since they in vanity lift themselves up, as Lucifer was expelled from heaven, and man from Paradise, on account of their pride. *Could not stand*. *Job 18: He shall drive him out of light into darkness* etc. *Psalm 121: Our feet were standing in thy courts*.
