# Section 1 — Psalm 42

**a. [A psalm of David] Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause from the nation that is not holy: deliver me from the unjust and deceitful man. For thou art God my strength: why hast thou cast me off? And why do I go sorrowful whilst the enemy afflicteth me?**

**b. Send forth thy light and thy truth: they have conducted me, and brought me unto thy holy hill, and into thy tabernacles. And I will go in to the altar of God: to God who giveth joy to my youth. To thee, O God my God, I will give praise upon the harp: why art thou sad, O my soul? And why dost thou disquiet me? Hope in God, for I will still give praise to him: the salvation of my countenance, and my God.**

In the preceding psalm, David spoke of his desire. Here, he adds a prayer for the sake of fulfilling (his) desire. First, he sets forth (his) prayer, (and) secondly, its effect, at, *Why art thou sad.* Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth(his) prayer in general, and (then) secondly, in particular (terms), at, *(Deliver me) from (unjust and) deceitful men.* First, he asks for judgment, and secondly, the result/execution of (this) judgment.

Therefore he prays, *Judge me, O God.* But this would seem to be presumptuous, since he himself says (later in the Psalter), *Enter not into judgment (with thy servant - Psalm 142:2).*

I respond saying that judgment is twofold, namely a judgment of severity, and a judgment of mercy or equity. The first occurs when only the event, and not the situation, is considered; and this is to be feared. (It is) concerning this (sort of judgment) that Psalm 142:2 speaks, *Enter not into judgment (with thy servant).* For our righteous deed are nothing before the face of God, as is said in Isaiah 64:6. This judgment is without mercy, as is said in James 2:1-13. The second (kind of judgment) occurs when not only the nature of the event, but also the person's situation. Psalm 102:13-14: *(As a father hath compassion on his children, so) hath the Lord compassion on them that fear him: for he knoweth our frame.* And this he seeks.

(This can be interpreted)in another way. Judgment is twofold. (First, there is the judgment) of examination, when (a person's) merits are examined. (The psalmist) does not ask for this here since (such an) examination is to be feared; Job 9:28: *I feared all my works, knowing that thou didst not spare the offender.* (Secondly) there is (the judgment) of discretion, namely of the separation from evil people. This he seeks. And so he adds, *And distinguish my cause.* This is referred to his present condition. In this way we seek to be "distinguished," or separated, from evil people, if not with respect to (the) place (wherein it is experienced), at least with respect to cause. For we have many things in common with evil people. Place is the result of chance, but cause is not since with respect to the same things, the good use (them) in one way, the evil in another; in the face of adversities, the good glow or shine on account of (their) patience, while the evil fume (or become dark) on account of their impatience. If, however, we refer (this) to the future judgment (of all), we seek to be "distinguished," or separated (from evil people) since the cause of evil people will be sentenced to condemnation, (but the cause) of good people (will be judged accordingly and brought) to salvation.

In particular, he seeks to be judged with respect to two things, namely liberation from evil, and advancement in good. Therefore, he seeks to be liberated from the evil of the present or in the future; whence he says, *Deliver me from the unjust and deceitful man.* The unjust man is called a devil; Matthew 13:28: *An enemy has done this.* Another kind of man is (called) a seducer, or the unjust whoever he may be. That man is called unjust who openly strives after injustice, but in fact is called deceitful because of (his) hidden fraudulence; Proverbs 12:20: *Deceit is in the heart of them that think evil things.* Therefore, someone is liberated from these (two types of people) on two accounts. First, so that he not be seduced by hidden deceit, and second, that he not be oppressed by adversity, *For thou art my God.*

Here he sets forth the reason for his liberation, and it is twofold. First, because of God who is able (to do this); whence he says, *Thou art my strength;* Isaiah 12:2: *The Lord is my strength and my praise.* And our strength is spoken of here as an effect, for it is from (God) himself; Isaiah 40:29: *It is he that giveth strength to the weary, and increaseth force and might to them that are not.* The second reason is for his own account, namely for the evils which he suffers.

We suffer some evils according to (our own) opinion, for when we are in adversities, we seem to have been cast off by God; whence he says, *Why hast thou cast me off?* But the Lord does not cast off his own people, (as is indicated at) Psalm 94:7. And so this is opined to be an evil. Another (way we suffer evil) is (when it is real or) true; whence it follows, *Why do I go sorrowful?* *Sorrowful,* namely, the sorrow because of the world which works unto death, and this is the sense. *Why do I go sorrowful,* temporarily, *Whilst the enemy afflicteth me,* evil men, temporarily.

Or (another interpretation of), *Do I go sorrowful,* (brings to mind) a good sorrow which works unto repentance for (our) salvation. And this is the sense (of) *Why do I go sorrowful,* to such a degree; for joy is also to be added to repentance.

*b. Send forth.* Here he sets forth (his desire for) advancement in good. And he seeks first divine goods by which he will be advanced, and secondly advancement on account of these (very goods themselves).

He seeks two goods, light and truth. One attains to God by the steps of the mind, and through knowledge. Hebrews 4:3: *For we, who have believed, shall enter into rest.* Two things are necessary for knowledge, namely light and (the thing which is) known. Ephesians 5:13: *All that is made manifest is light.* And so, he seeks for two things, namely light and truth: to which I, by myself, am not able to go. And so he says, *Send forth thy light and thy truth.*

Light and truth are the same here, because they are taken with respect to Christ, *Send forth they light,* that is, Christ; John 1:9: *That was the true light* etc.; *And your truth,* because Christ himself is the truth; John 14:6: *I am the way, and the truth, and the life;* it is as if (the psalmist) were saying, "God, O Father, send Christ forth."

Or, *Light* here could be taken for the law, because of (what is said at) Proverbs 6:23: *The commandment (of the Lord) is a lamp, and the law a light. And truth,* that is, the New Testament.

(His) advancement in good is subsequently set down. And first he sets forth (his) direction in approaching (God), at *They have conducted me,* namely (your) light and truth have guided me to you.

Or (another way of interpreting) *They have conducted (me,* is that) they have separated me from evil, *And brought me unto thy holy hill, and into thy tabernacles.* This prayer agrees with the desire of the preceding psalm (41:5) *I shall go over into the place (of the wonderful tabernacle, even to the house of God).* And because it (his desire) is not yet satisfied, I seek to be brought by God *to his holy hill.*

Jerusalem was at the foot of a hill on the north side. First, those who were going to that place used to arrive at the hill, then went to (their) dwelling, and finally, to the place of sacrifice, namely to the altar. And even there my spirit does not rest, but ascends to God; and thus he says, *(They) brought me unto thy holy hill, and into thy tabernacles,* that is to (his) dwelling. And again, he does not rest there, but goes the the house of God, that is, to the altar. Thus, he says, *I will go in to the altar of God;* And he does not rest there lest he appear to practice idolatry, but goes *To God who gives joy to my youth.*

Mystically (considered), *Unto thy holy hill* and *Into thy tabernacles* signfy the Church of the present time, or the heavenly Church; it is as if (the psalmist) were saying "They have conducted me into your Church." Isaiah 2:2: *The mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared on the top of the mountains (and it shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go, and say: Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord).* And *Tabernacles,* that is, the different ways of the saints, which are the pilgrimages of some upon the earth; Hebrews 11(13-16). And this Church is called the gate of heaven. Genesis 28:17: *This is no other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven.* And thus it is also said *To the altar of God,* that is God himself. Apocalypse 21:22: *God himself is the temple:* for all spiritual sacrifices are to be offered in God, and not in earthly things.

And there will be joy there. Isaiah 66:14: *You shall see and your heart shall rejoice.* Matthew25:21: *Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.* And thus he says, *(Who) giveth joy to my youth,* that is to say, there will be renewal and youth there; for, as it is said in Ephesians 4:7: *To every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the giving of Christ;* and thus he says *Youth;* Psalm 102:5: *Thy youth shall be renewed like the eagle's.* And the priests say this psalm when they go up to the altar, because these two, namely joy and renewal, are necessary to those who desire to go up to the heavenly altar; Leviticus 10:19: *How could I eat it, or please the Lord in the ceremonies, having a sorrowful heart?* Moreover, there is not the oldness of sin there; 1 John 2:14: *I write unto you, young men.*

Or, everything that has been said could be referred to (our) heavenly homeland, in which desire we ought to stand firm, and to which we ought to hasten with all desire: and this he signifies when he says, *Unto thy holy hill.* Exodus 15:17: *Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thy inheritance;* for there is a stability of condition there.

Moreover, there is there a fellowship of the holy; whence he says *And into thy tabernacles.* Numbers 24:5: *How beautiful are thy tabernacles, O Jacob;* Psalm 83:2: *How lovely are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts.* And they are called tabernacles because although men are citizens according to grace, nevertheless according to the condition of human nature they are guests there.

Third, *To the altar* signifies the humanity of Christ. Isaiah 33:17: *His eyes shall see the king in his beauty.* And Christ is signified by *To the altar of God.* Hebrews 13:10: *We have an altar, whereof they have no power to eat who serve the tabernacle;* for just as all carnal sacrifices were offered on the altars, so too are all prayers offered through Christ. Hence every prayer is ended, "Through Christ our Lord." But since there is no rest in humanity, thus does he tend to divinity; whence he says *To God.* Job 22:26: *Then shalt thou abound in delights in the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face to God.*

The result of prayer is an acknowledgement of praise; whence he says, *To thee, O God...I will give praise upon the harp:* and he says this in accordance with (his) feeling: for Isaiah 51:3 states: *Joy and gladness shall be found therein.* And he says, *Upon the harp,* with regard to the difference (between it and the) psaltery (a kind of lute); for the psaltery sounds from on high, but the harp from below; whence, *I will give praise upon the harp,* since we have been liberated from the evils of (this) world. And upon the psaltery, because we have attained that heavenly joy.

*Why art thou sad.* All that follows has been explained above in the preceding psalm (41).
