# Section 1 — Psalm 47

**[of the song of the daughters of Cor (for) the second sabbath] Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised in the city of our God, on his holy mountain.**

**Mount Sion is founded with the joy of the whole earth, on the sides of the north, the city of the great king. God shall be known in her houses, when he shall receive her.**

**For behold the kings of the earth are assembled, have gathered together. When they saw, they wondered, were disturbed and roused - trembling took hold of them. There were pains as of a woman in labour: with a vehement wind, you shall break in pieces the ships of Tharsis.**

**As we have heard, so we have seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God: God has founded her for ever.**

**We have received your mercy, O God, in the midst of your temple. According to your name, O God, so also is your praise to the ends of the earth; your right hand is full of justice. Let mount Sion rejoice, and the daughters of Juda be glad, because of your judgments, O Lord.**

**Surround Sion, and encompass her: tell in her towers. Set your hearts on her strength, and distribute her houses that you may relate it to another generation. For this is God, our God in eternity, and for ever and ever: he shall rule us for evermore.**

In the previous psalm, the psalmist invited the nations to sing praises to God concerning his beneficies. Here, however, he describes the great joy of the people or the city.

The title of the psalm is *A praise psalm of the song of the daughters of Cor for the second sabbath.*

Among the Jews, a most solemn sabbath used to be observed, and all the weekdays were named from the sabbath. So, the Lord's day used to be called the first sabbath, the next day, the second sabbath, and so on with the other days. Thus, he says, *For the second sabbath,* because in *Genesis 1,* God said on the first day, *Let there be light,* and on the second, he said, *Let there be a firmament.* By "light" in understood Christ, by "firmament", the Church is designated. Thus, because he treats here of the magnificence of the Church, this psalm is suitably called "for the second sabbath". In the Hebrew version, however, but not in Jerome's, there is no 'for the second sabath.'

The psalm is divided into two parts. The first describes the magnificence of the city, and the second speaks of the action of graces, at, *We have received your mercy, O God.* Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he describes the magnificence of the city, and second, he introduces his evidence, at, *For behold.*

The dignity of a city derives from her Lord. And so, he first commends the Lord, and secondly, the city, at, *(It) is founded.* He describes the Lord with respect to his own dignity and works.

On account of his dignity, because, *Great is the Lord - Psalm 76: Who is great like our God.* And his greatness is the immensity of his goodness. Augustine states: *In those things which are great not in bulk, greatness is the same as goodness.*

On account of his works, because, *(he is) exceedingly to be praised.* Praise properly regards works. And he says, *Exceedingly,* because however you praise him, you still fall short in praising him - *Ecclesiasticus 43: Glorifying God as much as ever you can, he will still far exceed.* And although he is manifest in all his creatures, nevertheless he spiritually appears in the benifices of grace by which the Church was established. And so he says, *In the city of our God,* namely the Church - *Apoc. 21: I saw the holy city Jerusalem* etc. And this city, namely the Church, is situated, *On his holy mountain.* This mountain is Christ - *Isaiah 2: (And is the last days) the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be (prepared on the top of mountains).* Of this city it is said at *Matthew 5: A city seated on a mountain cannot be hid.*

*(Mount Sion) is founded.* At this point, he commends the city in a three-fold way. First, on account of its size or pleasantness, second, its condition, and third, the widsom of its citizens.

Therefore, he says, *(Mount Sion) is founded with the joy of the whole earth;* it is as if he were saying, It has been founded on the mountain, that is, on Christ. But does not this foundation pertain to one land only? No, rather it overflows in joy to all lands, because all are aware of the joy of its foundation - *Psalm 65: Shout with joy to God all the earth, sing a psalm* etc.; *Isaiah 51: They will come into Sion singing praise; Lamentations 2: Is this the city of perfect beauty?*

Another version has, *The founder,* as if he were saying, Great is the Lord. And I say the Lord, who is the founder of this city. And this, *with joy.*

*Mount Sion...on the sides of the north,* that is situated on the side of Mount Sion to the north. "Sion" signifies the Jews, but "north" signifies the idolatrous gentiles. Therefore, this city is made up of Jews and Gentiles.

Jerome has a different version, and it corresponds to the mystery of the spouse - *Let him produce with joy for the whole world mount Sion, on the sides of the north of the great king's town.* And he explains according to the mystery. This city is praised on account of its government which he tends, and on account of Christ's humanity which he accepted. I say that she (the city) is great, and this is on account of her own splendid fruit, namely Christ. And this is joy for the whole world.

In the Hebrew version is found, *Exceedingly suitable of joy,* namely Christ, and this is on mount Sion.

*God shall be known in her houses.* At this point, he commends the city on account of the wisdom of her citizens. For true wisdom consists in the knowledge of God - *Jeremiah 9: Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understand and know me.* And thus he commends her (the city) for this reason, that God is known in her, and he says, *God shall be known in her houses.*

There is, however, a three-fold knowledge of God, since this can be referred to the condition of the city of Jerusalem, to the Church and to (her) future glory.

Therefore, there is a knowledge of God which is figurative and obscure. And this knowledge is found in the Old Testament. It is that sort of knowledge which was found in that city, namely Jerusalem, and in the Jewish people - *Psalm 75: God is known in Judea* etc. And according to this, it is said that *God shall be known in her houses.*

Jerome has, *God has been understood,* that is, not in one place, but in every house and city.

And he says, *In houses:* for God was known among the Athenians - *Acts 17: In whom we live, move and have our being; Romans 1: The invisible things of God* etc. But he was not known in the houses, but rather among those in the academies. But in that nation, all knew God.

There is another knowledge of God which is real, but obscure and incomplete. And this is knowledge by which God is known through faith- *1 Cor. 13: We see now through a glass darkly* etc. And thus, God is known in the houses with a real knowledge, but in faith - *2 Cor. 3: But we beholding the glory of the Lord with open face* etc.

And he says, *In houses:* for the entire universal Church contains under itself many churches, and many assemblies, of which every house is said to have a knowledge of God - *Jeremiah 31: They all shall know me from the least of them even to the greatest.*

Finally, there is that knowledge of God which is real, complete and clear - *1 Cor. 13: Then I shall know, even as I am known* in the houses of the heavenly Jerusalem.

The several houses are said of the diverse orders of the holy, namely, of the apostles, the martyrs, the confessors, the virgins, and so on - *John 4: In my Father's house there are many mansions.* And in relation to this, it is said in the Roman Psalter that *God will be known in his degrees:* for not everyone will know equally, but, with respect to some, there will be diverse grades of knowing - *1 Cor. 15: For star differs from star in clarity.*

But this will be, *When he shall receive her,* to help her. For he himself is our guardian and helper.

However, another version has, in helping.

*For.* At this point, he shows the dignity of the city through evidence. He first introduces witnesses, then their honesty, and finally their actual acknowledgement.

For evidence to be credible, three things are necessary. First, the dignity of one's witnesses, that they be authoritative. For if they are capricious, their evidence ought not to be accepted.

Second, their great number, and third, their concordance. And these three things are in these very witnesses, because they are of great dignity, *The kings of the earth;* one was Constantine, another Justinian, and the third was Charlemagne, all of whom strengthened the Church in its privileges.

Again, they were many, because they were assembled from different nations, and times. Also, by "kings" can be understood wise and just men who, having converted to the faith, bore witness to the Church - *Psalm 46: The princes of the peoples.*

Again, they are concordant, *They have gathered together,* namely in witness and opinion - *Psalm 101: When the people assemble together, and kings* etc.

Again, this can be explained in other ways; but the first exposition is literal, because *The have borne witness* is in Jerome's version.

The greek version has, *They will help her,* namely so as to defend (her). And this is necessary, *For behold the kings of the earth are assembled, have gathered together,* namely against the Church. And these are the very ones who will at some point bear witness - at some time they were against the Church, and at other times they persecuted her: thereafter, they strengthened her.

*When they saw.* Here, their honesty is described in seven ways. First, there is vision, that is, the understanding of (or *brought about by)* faith. Thus he says, *When they saw,* that is, when they understood through faith the miracles which Christ and the apostles performed - *Isaiah 62: The gentiles will see your just one, and all kings your glorious one.*

Second, there is wonder in those things which were seen, because they are above human sense and reason - *Isaiah 60: (Then) shall you see, and abound, and your heart shall wonder and be enlarged; Psalm 138: Wonderful are your works.*

Third, there is disturbance on account of sins. Because of the second, *They wondered.* Because of the third, *They were disturbed - Psalm 59: You have shaken the ground, and have disturbed it.*

Fourth, there is a rousing (or *stirring*). At times, one is disturbed by sin, and then falls into despair, or persists in evil. But these people (those of the city) are roused to repentance - *Isaiah 24: With trembling the earth shall be moved.*

The fifth is that this rousing ought to take place accompanied by the fear of God, so that the person being roused does not attribute to himself that he is moved to the good by himself, but rather by God. And so, he says, *Trembling took hold of them - Psalm 2: Serve the Lord with fear.*

This pain and trembling are fruitful. Thus he says, *There were pains as of a woman in labour,* which are turned into joy on account of the hope and fruit of offspring - *Isaiah 26: From fear from you, O Lord, we have conceived, and have brought forth the spirit of deliverance.* And this is the sixth.

The seventh is, *With a vehement wind, you shall break in pieces the ships of Tharsis,* that is, the sea in general. And so, you shall break in pieces the ships of the sea.

Or it ought to be said that there is a province which is called Cilicia, and Tharsis (where Paul was born) is its capital. On account of that city, the whole region is called Tharsis and there were many ships there. Or, again, as the first sailors on the Mediterranean Sea, they (the people of Cilicia) built Carthage and, fighting together with the Tyrians, enjoyed great power. And thus, Tharsis is called the world's entire sea.

By "ships", which they were eager to trade, is signified "greediness", and this is an abundance of the things of the world. And as ships swell upon the sea, so too do the rich in worldly things.

But when a man is turned to repentance, then the ships, that is, the desires of this world, are wrecked. *But with a vehement wind,* namely with the Holy Spirit - *Abdias 1: For the day of the Lord is at hand upon the nations; Isaiah 23: Howl, ye ships of the sea.*

But according to Cassiodorus, by this is designated the entire time of Christ's incarnation. *God is known in his homes when he receives it,* that is, human nature into the unity of (his) person - *Isaiah 52: On account of this the people shall know my name.* And why? *Because behold the kings of the earth are assembled, have gathered together.*

The kings, namely the leaders of the Jews and the scribes of the people, are assembled by Herod asking them where Christ was born, *and* *have gathered together,* namely that he had been born in Bethlehem.

And those seeing in this manner, *wondered and were disturbed* (as the prophets had said), because Herod was troubled, and all of Jerusalem with him - *Matthew 3.*

*And they were disturbed,* some towards faith. And the dread was so great that the body trembled - *Trembling took hold of them* - and, *There were pains as of a woman in labour,* on account of the slaughter of the innocents killed by Herod. *With a vehement wind,* because ordering in anger, he killed all the boys two years of age and younger.

And in his anger, he ordered all the ships of Tharsis to be burned, that is, in Tharsis of Cilicia, which ships he believed had borne the Magi (returning by another route) to their homeland. Therefore he says, *With a vehement wind.*

*As we have heard.* Here, he sets forth their acknowledgment and the testimony of the witnesses. And first, they acknowledge his truth which they have heard.

*As we have heard,* through the declaration of the apostles; *So we have seen,* that is, we have understood (it) to be true. They said this when they had turned to Christ.

Or, as it is the acknowledgement of the Jews: We ourselves have heard through the prophets, and, behold, we now see. However, it sometimes happens that one hears something great, and does not believe it to be so, until it is experienced. Jacob says this at *Genesis 28: Truly this very place is holy* etc.; *3 Kings 10: The Queen of Saba, who came to experience as she had heard, did not yet believe the entire wisdom of Solomon,* who saw more incredible things in him than the things that she had heard. And so there are those who see more things than they have heard before they have come to faith.

And where will we see? *In the city of the Lord of hosts,* namely, of the heavenly hosts. Where he shows that in reality He (God) can lead (one) to that place. And lest one believe that he is lofty and that you cannot go to him, he says, *In the city of our God,* as if to say, Thus is the God of hosts, who nevertheless is our God.

*And he has founded her,* namely this very city, not in time, but in eternity - *Eccl. 26: As everlasting foundations upon a solid rock.*

*We have received.* Previously, the Psalmist described the great things of the city. Here, he describes the action of graces. And concerning this, he does two things. First, he determines the action of graces, and second, people are invited to consider once again the great things of the city, at, *Surround.*

Just as it is said elsewhere, *The ways of the Lord taken all together are mercy and truth.* Hence, the action of graces pertains first to the effect of divine mercy, and second, to the effect of justice, at, *Your right hand is full of justice.* Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he presents the perfection of divine mercy, and second, the effect of this perfection, at, *According to your name.*

With respect to the surface meaning of this text, it is read not according to the persona of the Jews, but of one wondering and saying, *As we have heard* etc.

*We have received your mercy O God.* This likewise can be read according to the persona of the Jews.

But he says, *We have received* etc. The mercy of the Lord can be understood in a three-fold way. First, the effect of grace, which effect is conferred in the sacraments of Christ - *Titus 3: According to his mercy he saved us by the laver of regeneration* etc. And in the Church, everyone in general receives mercy, but the good receive mercy with the sacraments, that is, the grace and effect of the sacrifice. However, the bad receive only the sacrament. Thus, the good say, We ourselves, *Have received mercy,* that is, your grace, *In the midst of your temple;* in the temple, sinners are on the outside, the virtuous and the just, in its midst.

The Lord's mercy can be understood, secondly, as Christ himself, who was given to us because of God's mercy - *For the time of his giving mercy has come.*

And so, this can be explained with respect to the two-fold aspect of the temple and of reception, namely of the body. Consequently, these words are of Simeon the just. O God, we have received your mercy, namely Christ, in our arms in the midst of your temple, namely materially.

Third, the Lord's mercy can be understood with respect to the reception of the faith; and its sense is thus: O God, we ourselves have received Christ, mercifully given through the faith - *James 1: With meekness receive the ingrafted word.*

*In the midst of your temple,* that is, in agreement with the Church. For those who do not accept the general teaching of the Church do not receive this mercy - *Eccl. 15: In the midst of the Chruch she shall open his mouth.*

*According to your name O God.* Here, he sets down the effect of this reception. It is as if he were saying, On account of the fact that we have received your name, your praise has been spread out over the whole world. And this, *According to your name O God,* who is essentially good. And whoever knows God in that measure, praises him as he knows him. And so he says, *According to your name O God,* that is, according to the knowledge which he has of you - *So also is your praise.* And because he is known everywhere, this is the reason he says, *To the ends of the earth - Malachi 1: From the rising of the sun, even to its setting, my name is great among the nations.*

Or, *To the ends of the earth,* that is, in the entire Church, which has been spread out everywhere.

Or, because your praise is not genuine except among the holy who truly praise you, because they truly know you - *John 7: I know him.*

*You right hand is full of justice.* Here, he commends justice. First, he sets forth the commendation of justice, and second, its effect.

And so I say that *We have received your mercy,* but not without justice. Assuredly, *Your right hand is full of justice.* By the hand of God is meant his active power. And God has two hands, his right by which he rewards the good, and his left by which he punishes the evil - *Matthew 25: he shall set the sheep on his right hand* etc. In each hand, there is justice; but in his left hand there is not full justice, because he punishes on the side of the worthy; in his right hand, however, there is full justice, because he rewards abundantly - *Luke 6: good measure (and pressed down and shaken together); Romans 8: For I reckon that the sufferings of this time are not worthy (to be compared with the glory to come).*

*Your right hand,* that is, future glory, *is full of justice,* because there is no one there except the just - *Isaiah 60: Your people shall be all just.*

*Let Mount Sion rejoice.* Here, he sets down the effect of justice which his left hand did, and this is lamentation. But the effect of justice which his right hand accomplished is joy - *Psalm 18: The justices of the Lord are right, rejoicing hearts.* It was said earlier that the effect of mercy extends itself to the ends of the earth. But here he attributes the effect of justice to Mount Sion and to the daughters of Juda. The Apostle also says this at *Romans 15: For I say that Christ Jesus was minister of the circumcision* etc. Thus, because he has promissed the daughters of Sion - *Zacharia 9: Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion* etc.

*Let Mount Sion rejoice,* because it is of justice which promise is kept for her. But since the promise was not made to the nations, mercy was that which was given. However, it can be said that Mount Sion signifies the whole of Jerusalem.

*And the daughters of Juda be glad,* that is, of acknowledgement, that is, all the people of the Jews, *Be glad.* And let them do this *Because of your judgments O Lord,* since they are right.

*Surround.* Here, he impells us to a more diligent consideration so that it may be understood that the kings have now, by length, seen great things; but nevertheless, David invites all so that they might consider (these things) further. First, he invites them to do this, and second, he adds the cause of the invitation.

Therefore, he says, *Surround,* namely the Church militant, or the Church, triumphant with the eye of contemplation - *Song of Songs 3: I will rise, and will go about the city* etc. Some surround the Church with a wicked eye so as to attack her. But we surround her so as to love her. And thus he says, *And encompass her,* namely with loving - *Psalm 25: I have loved, O Lord, the beauty of they house.* Jerome's version has *Travel around,* go outside as it were, and travel around through the towns, and *Tell in her towers.*

At this point, he impells us to a consideration in spiritual terms. There are three eminent things in the city, namely its towers, walls and streets.

With respect to the first, he says, *Tell in her towers.* Jerome has *Wonder at her towers.* Towers are for seeing at a distance. Thus the towers of the Church are her prelates, and were her Apostles; it is as if he were saying, Wonder at the Apostles and prelates.

Or, *Tell,* that is doctors according to the teachings of the Apostles and of the learned.

With respect to the second he says, *Set your hearts on her strength.* Jerome has, *Set your heart in his hands.* And this is the power of the Holy Spirit, who defends this city - *Luke 24: But stay you in the city till you be endued with power.* This power is love - *Song of Songs 8: For love is strong as death.*

With respect to the third he says, *And distribute her houses.* Jerome has, *Separate her houses, distinguish her palaces.* Distinguish, namely through right judgment. For there are some who, because of some evil men, want to condemn the entire Church. Thus, he says, *Distribute,* that is, you ought not to condemn the good because of the bad - *Genesis 18: Far be it from you, O Lord, to slay the just with the wicked.*

Or, *Distribute her houses,* namely by managing different churches with different ministers, so that there is not confusion in the Church, just as Paul was the Apostle of the gentiles, and Peter was the minister of the circumcision, that is, the Apostle of the Jews.

Another version has, *Her degrees,* that is, her different orders: subdeacons, deacons and priests - *Ephesians 4: And he gave some Apostles,* etc.

The purpose of this consideration is the praise of God. And first, he sets down to whom the praise of God will be announced, and second, why it will be announced. And so, he says, *That you may relate it,* namely what you have heard - *Isaiah 21: That which I have heard of the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, I have declared unto you:* because what one has accepted, ought to be communicated to others, *To another generation,* namely to sinners.

Or, *Another,* that is, a future generation. And what will you announce? Two things, since every proclamation should be ordered to two things, namely to show the magnificence of God, just as when he proclaims the faith, or to announce the kindnesses of God, so that charity be inflamed in their hearts.

With respect to the first, he says, *For this is God, our God - Baruch 3: This is our God...Afterwards he was seen upon earth; Hebrews 13: Jesus Christ, yesterday, and today, and the same forever.*

With respect to the second, he says, *He shall rule us forever more - Matthew 28: Behold I am with you always* etc; *Psalm 22: The Lord ruleth me: and I shall want for nothing.*
