# Section 1 — Psalm 48

***Unto the end, a psalm for the sons of Core.* Hear these things, all ye nations: give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world. All you that are earthborn, and you sons of men: both rich and poor together.**

**My mouth shall speak wisdom: and the meditation of my heart prudence. I will incline my ear to a parable; I will open my proposition on the psaltery.**

**Why shall I fear in the evil day? the iniquity of my heel shall encompass me. They that trust in their own strength, and glory in the multitude of their riches, no brother can redeem, nor shall man redeem: he shall not give to God his ransom, Nor the price of the redemption of his soul: and shall labor for ever, and shall still live unto the end.**

**He shall not see destruction, when he shall see the wise dying: the senseless and the fool shall perish together:**

**And they shall leave their riches to strangers: and their sepulchres shall be their houses for ever. Their dwelling places to all generations: they have called their lands by their names.**

**And man when he was in honor did not understand; he is compared to senseless beasts, and is become like to them.**

**This way of theirs is a stumbling block to them: and afterwards they shall delight in their mouth.**

**They are laid in hell like sheep: death shall feed upon them. And the just shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their help shall decay in hell from their glory. But God will redeem my soul from the hand of hell, when he shall receive me.**

**Be not thou afraid, when a man shall be made rich, and when the glory of his house shall be increased. For when he shall die he shall take nothing away; nor shall his glory descend with him.**

**For in his lifetime his soul will be blessed: and he will praise thee when thou shalt do well to him. He shall go in to the generations of his fathers: and he shall never see light. Man when he was in honor did not understand: he hath been compared to senseless beasts, and made like to them.**

Previously, the psalmist invited the nations to gladness and thanksgiving for the gifts given to the people of God. In this psalm, he advises them to trust in God. Concerning this he does two thing. First, he rouses (their) attention, and second, he pursues (his) intention.

The title (of this psalm) is not new. According to it, a man is made attentive in two ways, namely on the part of those listening, or on the part of the things that are about to be said, when one promises that one is about to say some great things - Proverb 8: "Hear, for I will speak of great things." And it is in this latter sense that the psalmist speaks here. Thus, he first makes them attentive on the part of those to whom he was speaking, and secondly, on the part of the things about to be said, at *My mouth.*

Thus he says that what he is about to say pertains to every difference between men and to all (people). He mentions four differences between men. One concerns the diversity of peoples, since some were Jewish, while others were gentiles. Another difference concerns (their) location. Another, (their) origin, for some were noble and distinguished, while others were not. The last difference concerns (their) fortunes, since some were rich, while others were not.

He considers the first when he says, *Hear these things, all ye nations,* and not just of the Jews, since to hear this belongs to all. And this is necessary - Proverbs 1: "A wise man shall hear..."

He considers the second when he says, *Give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world,* that is, in whatever part of the world (they may be). He says, *Give ear,* because it is necessary to hear and understand - Matthew 13: "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear", that is, let him attend.

Jerome has "The inhabitants of the west," as if this were a kind of prophecy. For the faith of Christ especially thrives in the people of the west, while in the northern (regions) there are still many gentiles, and in the eastern (parts) there are many schismatics and infidels.

Or, *Hear these things, all ye nations,* is referred to evil (people, while) *All ye inhabitants of the world* is referred to the good who govern the earth.

He considers the third when he says, *All you that are earthborn,* that is, those who are ignoble, *and you sons of men,* namely the noble.

Jerome has, *As much the sons of Adam as the sons of individuals,* since some have no idea of who their ancestors were.

In the mystical sense, the *Earthborn* are sinners who cling to the earth through (their) desires. Hence they are compared to the serpent - Isaiah 65: "The dust shall be the serpent's (that is, the earthly person's) food." *The sons of men* are called good who are the image of God and of Christ, who is the Son of man.

He considers the fourth when he says, *Both rich and poor together,* as if to say, "Everyone, heed these teachings" since they are useful to all. And what are these teachings? Matthew 5: "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven"; Ecclesiasticus 31: "Blessed is the rich man that is found without blemish." However, some are rich in actuality, but not in (their) desires. And this can be a holy (one), like Abraham, and Ludovic, the king of France. Others are rich in actuality and in their desires. And this does not describe a holy (one). Concerning this, Matthew 19 says "It is easier for a camel to pass..." etc., because just as it is contrary to nature for the camel to pass through the eye of a needle, so too is it contrary to divine justice for the rich (in this latter sense) to pass into the kingdom of heaven. And such are the *earthborn,* but the former are *the sons of men.*

*My mouth.* Here, he makes them attentive through the promise of things that are about to be said.

Whoever teaches, teaches either human affairs or words. When we proclaim faith and morals, we teach human affairs; when we expound upon Scripture, we teach words. And so, first he speaks about first teaching, and then he speaks about the second at, *I will incline.*

The knowledge of human affairs is necessary for two reasons, namely for the knowledge of truth, and for the purpose of acting. Thus all knowledge of truth, which is necessary for us concerning other affairs, must be referred to the knowledge of the truth of divine affairs. Consequently, Augustine says, "He who examines this thoroughly, but not referring it to the eternal, is lazy." In this way, every knowledge of truth belongs to wisdom, and, consequently, the psalmist says, *My mouth shall speak wisdom* - 1 Cor. 2: "We speak wisdom among the perfect."

However, that which is necessary with respect to the purpose of acting belongs to prudence by which the direction of human affairs is accomplished. And thus, the psalmist says, *And the meditation of my heart* shall speak *prudence* - Proverbs 10: "Wisdom is prudence in man", because wisdom brought to bear upon human and corporal affairs is prudence.

*I will incline.* Here he speaks about the second kind of teaching, namely of obscure words. These (obscure words) are necessary in two ways. First, that one might be eager to understand them, and second, that one might be eager to explain them to others.

With respect to the first, he says, *I will incline my ear to a parable.* A parable is a teaching when it has an obscure image or representation. It is as if he were saying, " I will study so as to understand the sayings of other people" - Proverbs 1: "He shall attend to a parable and its interpretation; the words of the wise, and their mysterious sayings."

Or, *I will incline my ear to a parable,* which God speaks, because He speaks enigmatically, as if to say, "I will incline my intellect to the Lord's voice who speaks parabolically.

*I will open my proposition on the psaltery.* Proposition is said in a twofold way. In one way, (it is) that which I wish for in preference to other things, that which I desire more - that (very thing) *will I open on the psaltery,* that is, in my activity, because here is the best way of opening his proposition. For if you propose to enter life eternal, you do not clearly show your proposition if you do not practice good activity.

Or (in the second way), proposition is (understood as) obscure speech, or (as) the cause of temptation; thus Samson, in Judges 14, proposed problems: whence he says "If you had not ploughed with my heifer"; and in this way is this proposition understood. And for this reason, Jerome says that it is obscure speech.

The Hebrew version has *My divination,* which amounts to the same thing.

*Why shall I fear evil?* Having set forth the psalm's introduction, in which he rouses the people's attention, he now proceeds to (his) main purpose which is to lead men not to fear evil at hand, nor to trust in goods of the present time. Rather, his fear and trust is in God alone. Concerning this he does two things. First, he shows what is to be feared, and second, what they ought not to fear, at *Be not thou afraid.* Concerning the former, he does two things. First, he sets forth (his) intent, and second, he proves his proposition, at, *They that trust.* Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth a question, and second, he offers a conclusion.

The question is, *Why shall I fear in the evil day?* First it must be discerned what this evil day is, for all days are from God. They are called evil on account of the evils that happen on them - Ephesians 5: "Redeeming the time, because the days are evil." Therefore, a day can be called evil on which some danger happens, especially (that day) on which the danger of eternal damnation overtakes one. This is the day of judgment - Sophonias 1: "The voice of the day of the Lord is bitter, the mighty man shall there meet with tribulation." Therefore, (the question) *Why shall I fear in the evil day?* that is, "What will cause me to fear on that day?" And the psalmist responds, *The iniquity of my heel shall encompass me.* For nothing is to be feared except sin, since no misfortune will be suffered if no iniquity governs one - Proverbs 28: "The wicked man fleeth, when no man pursueth (but the just, bold as a lion, shall be without dread)"; Ecclesiasticus 34: "He that feareth the Lord shall tremble at nothing"; and thus he says, *The iniquity of the heel.*

Three things can be understood by the word "heel". First, that it is an extreme part of the body. And in this way, *The iniquity of my heel* is that iniquity which lasts until the end of (one's) life, in which fashion it is understood as *heel* - Genesis 3: "She (namely the woman) shall crush thy head", namely the higher reason; but she shall crush the serpent's head: and "thou shall lie in wait for her heel", that is, you will lie in wait for it until the end of (your) life.

Secondly, "heel" can be understood as the weakness of the flesh. For when a man falls, his heel slips away. And so, *The iniquity of the heel,* that is, the sin coming from the weakness of the flesh, *shall encompass me.*

Thirdly, ("heel" can be understood as) unjust persecution which someone brings against another. With respect to this there is John 13: "He that eateth bread with me, shall lift up his heel against me." And so, *The iniquity of the heel,* that is, unjust persecution, will be cast back against the persecutor - Proverbs 5: "His own iniquities catch the wicked (and he is fast bound with the ropes of his own sin)."

*They that trust in their own strength.* Here, he sets down the reason why (this evil day) is to be feared, namely because of sin. There is a two-fold reason that sin is to be feared. First, on account of the impossibility of avoiding the punishment of sin - Job 11: "...the way to escape shall fail them, and their hope the abomination of the soul." Secondly, on account of the evils that befall the evil. Therefore, he sets down, first, the impossibility of evading punishment, and secondly, shows the evils that befall the evil, at, *He shall not see.*

Someone evades punishment, first, through outside help, secondly, through one's own solicitude, and third, on account of a lacking in the subject, as when he is dead. And he shows that in no one of these ways can one evade (punishment), first on account of help, nor, secondly, through the assistance provided by oneself, nor, thirdly, through a lacking in the subject.

He who desires to be freed through (outside) help, is freed sometimes by the power of his own army - John 18: "If my kingdom were of this world, my servants (would certainly strive that I should not be delivered to the Jews...). At other times, (one is freed) through riches - Proverbs 6: "...he shall give up all the substance of his house" and shall free himself. Sometimes, (one is freed) by (one's) friends. And he shows that none of these can free one from the punishment of sin. And although, according to the Gloss, it could be read otherwise, nevertheless according to the Hebrew version, it is read that God frees those who trust in him.

*No brother can redeem,* as if to say, "No brother can redeem those who trust in (their own strength or riches)." Thus in this way he first shows that through the help of (one's) friends, one is not helped with respect to the punishment of sin. For the strength of friends is slight. On this account, then, one should not trust in the bodily strength of (one's) friends. And so he says, *They that trust in their own strength,* namely of their friends, or (for that matter) in their own particular power, since "There is a way which seemeth just to a man: but the ends thereof lead to death" as Proverbs 14 states.

Again, *They that glory in the multitude of their riches,* are not freed by them all from the punishment of sin, because Proverbs 11 states: "Those who trust in their riches shall fall." Man should not trust in bodily or spiritual riches, but should seek, insofar as he can, his salvation - Jeremiah 9: "Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, and let not the strong man glory in his strength, and let not the rich man glory in his riches". No person composited in his very being can, in any way, redeem himself, that is to say, free himself from sin or punishment - Ezechial 14: "If...these three men be in the midst thereof...Noe, Daniel and Job...they shall deliver their own souls by their justice."

But since a brother, no matter how great he is, cannot redeem his neighbor through his own power, *Shall man redeem?* No, because man cannot take someone away from God's hand; only God redeems them. And *Man,* namely Christ, as the *Price,* namely, so that (his) death may have a place in (man's redemption), and *God,* that he have the power of redeeming.

Or otherwise, *Brother,* that is, Christ, who is our true brother - Psalm 21: "I will declare thy name to my brethren"; Song of Songs 8: "Who shall give thee to me for my brother" etc. If that one will not redeem, who else will? As if to say "No one".

*He shall not give to God his ransom.* Here, he shows that they do not avoid punishment on account of something they do while they are in sin. The reason for this is that sinners stand in need of a two-fold remedy because of a two-fold evil which they have incurred, namely God's displeasure, and punishment's debt. And for this reason they need to satisfy God, which they themselves cannot do, since, by the very fact that they themselves are not pleasing to God and are His enemies, he does not accept their gifts. Thus he says, *He shall not give to God his ransom,* because external things do not satisfy God, unless they be interior graces which the pure man cannot give.

Furthermore, they need to be absolved from punishment. And this also man cannot do. Whence he says, *Nor the price of the redemption of his soul,* namely (that which) the pure man can give. For this reason he cannot free (himself) from punishment - Psalm 88: "Who is the man that shall live, and not see death: that shall deliver his soul from the hand of hell?" But Christ, who is God and man, gave satisfaction on our behalf - Romans 5: "When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God (by the death of his Son)."

Again, only *The price of the redemption* - 1 Peter 1: "...you were..redeemed...from your vain conversations...(with the precious blood of Christ)."

Or, *He shall not give,* that is, he shall not care to give satisfaction, and, *The price of the redemption of his soul,* namely of that one who trusts in (his) riches. And according to this (interpretation), another version can be linked (with the one here) which says, "brother", namely Christ, "cannot redeem", because these very people do not care to satisfy God through penance, and Christ does not help those who do not wish to help themselves.

*And shall labor.* Here he shows that he does not escape through his own lacking, because it is always punished. Hence he says, *He shall labor for ever,* that is, he shall be punished with eternal suffering - Matthew 25: "These shall go into everlasting punishment", because they do not wish to labor now - Psalm 72: "They are not in the labor of men". For whenever someone is in himself (that is to say, making himself into the end), he sins in eternity, because he prefers sin to God's law. And for this reason, they do not fear punishment, but always want to sin. *And shall still live unto the end,* that is, his life shall not be lacking in punishments - Job 20: "He shall be punished for all that he did, and yet shall not be consumed."

*He shall not see.* Previously, the psalmist showed what is to be feared on account of sin, that there is no way of avoiding punishment. Here, he treats of those evils which threaten them on account of their lack of foresight. Concerning this latter, he does three things. He recalls, first, their lack of foresight concerning future evils, and second, those evils which threaten (them), at, *They shall leave...to strangers.* Lastly, he describes (his) hope of God through which he hopes to be freed from these evils, at, *But (God).* Concerning the first he does two things. First, he shows their lack of foresight, and second, the cause of (their) ignorance, at, *When he shall see.*

And so, he says that so many evils threaten that kind of person (that) *He shall not see,* that is, he will not consider, his *Destruction,* that is, his damnation. Ecclesiaasticus 7: "For it is of the just to remember (their) last end." [ed. perhaps *Ecclesiasticus 7:40: "in omnibus operibus tuis memorare novissima tua et in aeternum non peccabis* - "In all thy works remember thy last end, and thou shalt never sin."]

Deuteronomy 32 speaks of these people: "They are a people without counsel, and without wisdom." And why do the unjust not anticipate (these things) for themselves? The reason is given at Ecclesiastes 9: "This is a very great evil among all things that are under the sun, that the same things happen to all men." Thus, they do not consider what might happen to them in the future. And so even when they see wise men dying, they do not consider their glory, seeing the death of the body - Wisdom 4: "They shall see the end of the wise man, and shall not understand what God hath designed for him."

There is a difference between the senseless and the foolish. The senseless person is he who has human knowledge, and does not consider the eternal, while the foolish person is he who does not even consider (the knowledge of) the present.

Or, the senseless person is he who does not attend to present evils, but (rather concerns himself with) future evils, while the foolish person is he who attends (to present evils) and does not avoid (future ones). Hence he says, *The senseless and the fool shall perish together.*

According to Jerome, the contempt of the unjust has a two-fold cause, namely length of life, and that they see the wise and the senseless to die together.

*And they shall leave.* Here, he sets down the evils that happen to sinners. First, he describes those evils which belong to the present, and second, those which will happen in the future, at, *Like sheep.* Concerning the former, he does two things. First, he describes those evils which happen in the present as far as concerns extrinsic goods, and second, (those which regard) intrinsic goods, at, *When he was in honor.* And he shows first that evil destroys by means of death.

He says that *Their riches* destroy. So, he says, *They shall leave their riches to strangers* - Jeremiah 17: "(As the partridge hath hatched eggs which she did not lay: so) is he that hath gathered riches, and not by right: in the midst of his days he shall leave them." He says, *Theirs,* possessed, as it were, by them, or that they are not used by them for the benefit of others - Philippians 2: "All seek the things that are their own." He says, *To strangers,* because frequently strangers, that is, those who are not blood relatives, receive their riches - Psalm 38: "He storeth up: and he knoweth not for whom he shall gather these things."

Even if at times he releases his riches to his sons, nevertheless they are strangers, as Luke 10 indicates: "That one was a neighbor who showed mercy to him." And it happens that sons and nephews do nothing of good to the dead; but two of this world's things are left to them, namely the sepulchre and the man's reputation. The second (is treated of) at, *Their dwelling places.*

With respect to the first, he says: They have homes, vineyards, vehicles, and many valuable things. But what will they have in death? For their palace, they will have *Their sepulchres,* and this, *Forever,* that is, they will dwell in their sepulchres until the day of judgment.

Or for this (reason), that they make careful sepulchres, believing that they will dwell in them forever. But they are deceived because their sepulchres too will be destroyed. Hence although according to their opinion those sepulchres will be their dwelling place forever, nevertheless, it is not so.

Jerome('s version of this text, however, has it differently): *Their interiors shall be their houses forever,* because man has two houses, namely an exterior one, which does not stand forever, and an interior one, namely his consciousness, which does remain - Isaiah 38: "Take order with thy house." Either good or evil, it stands forever.

*Their dwelling places.* Here he shows that neither fame nor a man's achievements remain after his death. A man's achievements are firm buildings. Hence he says, *Their dwelling places to all generations,* as if to say, "Thus they are built as if they are to last up to the end." But they are deceived because they will be destroyed - Job 21: "Where is the house of the prince? and where are the dwelling places of the wicked?"; Mark 13: "Seest thou all these great buildings? There shall not be left (a stone upon a stone, that shall not be thrown down.") And he says *Their dwelling places,* because they shall not remain in them for long.

*They have called their lands by their names;* as if to say, "This is the intention of their building, that they be celebrated in their lands" - Genesis 11: "Come, let us make a city and a tower...and let us make our name famous..."; Ecclesiasticus 40: "...the building of a city shall establish a name...". Hence, they call cities by their name; and he says, *Their (lands),* because a name does not extend much outside of one's own land. And so, the fool is that man who makes his own name famous in his land.

Or, *They have called their names,* that is, of the dead, *in their lands,* when carrying food to their sepulchres.

*And man.* Previously, the psalmist set forth those evils which threaten the evil as far as concerns the loss of external (things). At this point, he describes those things which threaten them on account of the corruption of interior goods. Concerning this he does two things. First, he sets forth the evil of interior corruption, and second, he shows what follows because of this evil, at, *This way of theirs.*

One should note that man is a composite of a rational and a sensitive nature. With respect to the former, man has a likeness to God and the angels - Genesis 1: "Let us make man to our image and likeness" and Psalm 8: "Thou hast made him a little less than the angels." However, with respect to his sensitive nature, man participates in (the nature of the other) animals. Therefore, the psalmist first describes the honor of man in so far as he has a likeness to the angels. Hence he says, *And man when he was in honor.* According to Aristotle, honor is something more excellent than praise, since praise is ordained to another, while honor is (pursued) for and in itself.

He says, *Was,* namely, similar to God. And because of this similarity, he puts forth three things. First, that he not consider this, namely, that he is similar to God, second, that he avoid bestial ignorance and ignobility, and third, that he follows after the bestial act.

With respect to the first, he says, *(He) did not understand,* namely that he was made in God's image, and that it was fitting (for him) to possess the heavens - Wisdom 2: "They hoped not for the wages of justice, nor esteemed the honor of holy souls."

With respect to the second, he says, *He is compared to beasts.* Brute animals function by way of (their) passions, which is clear (for example, with the) dog which immediately barks when angry, (or) the horse which whinnies when aroused. But this is not imputed to them, since they lack reason. Therefore, if a man immediately follows his passion when aroused, and strikes when angered, *He is compared* in his activities *to the senseless beasts* - Psalm 31: "Do not become like the horse and the mule (who have no understanding)."

With respect to the third, he says, *And is become like to them.* For when a brutes' nature is inclined to something, it(s nature) is accustomed (to this thing) by a passion, and is turned to (this thing) in (its) nature through a habit. Therefore, when man becomes habituated to living according to (his) passions, henceforth he is turned to (them, namely his passions) in (his very) nature. And in this way, he *is become like to them,* through habit weighed down by evil deeds - Jeremiah 5: "They are become as amorous horses and stallions: (every one neighed after his neighbor's wife)". And thus Aristotle says that the evil man is worse than the evil beasts because when malice or badness possesses intellect, it devises diverse evils.

*This way.* Here, he shows what follows by reason of this evil which they incur, namely that they are made bestial. For someone could say that nothing of evil follows from that circumstance. But it is not so. On the contrary, the one thing follows from the other. First, he shows what follows with respect to them, and second, with respect to others.

With respect to the former, he says, *This way,* namely that it follows the passions, *is a stumbling block to them,* that they are thrown into confusion within - Psalm 68: "Let their table become as a snare before them...a stumbling block."

In like manner, they are thrown into confusion externally, since they are punished and disgraced. (As) Aristotle (states), "The wicked are filled with repentance."

With respect to (what) follows (with respect) to others, (the psalmist states) *And afterwards they shall delight in their mouth.* This is explained in two ways.

First, after they have been scandalized and have done evil, they desire that others follow them. And in this way, they are eager to be found pleasing to them, so that they might draw them to sinning - Proverbs 1: "(My son,) if sinners shall entice thee, (consent not to them.)"

Second, (the psalmist) finds fault with (their) pretence. It is as if he were saying, " *Afterwards,* now that they are thrown into confusion and are following evil things, *they shall delight in their mouth,* that is, they are eager to speak holy and flattering things - Matthew 23: "Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; because you are like to whited sepulchres (which outwardly appear to men beautiful, but within are full of dead men's bones, and of all filthiness.)" Even to wickedness.

The Gloss states that pretenders are worse than the openly evil. But is this true? It would seem not - Isaiah 3: "They have proclaimed (abroad) their sin as Sodom (and they have not hid it)." Jerome's Gloss states " *Secunda tabula* is to sin secretly."

It must be said that it is one thing not to make one's sin known, and another to feign innocence. For to make one's sin known is evil, since it scandalizes others. But to feign innocence, so as to draw others to sin, is a worse evil. And it is of this that he speaks here.

Another version has, "He shall bless God in his mouth." This is explained in the following way. Although they are bestial within, nevertheless they bless God externally with their lips - Isaiah 29: "...with their lips (they) glorify me (but their heart is far from me)."

Or one could say that they bless God concerning the evils which they have done.

Jerome has "Their justices run after them", as if to say, "He did not understand, and became like unto the beasts, and from that moment on they were scandalized and thus it happens because they wanted to be bestial." Thus, "After them", that is, in the end they will be consumed by the beasts, that is, by the demons, as if to say, "They ran after the demons into hell."

*Like sheep.* At this point, he describes those evils which will befall sinners after this life, and (this) because he has already stated that there are three evils, namely that they are like unto the beasts, that they despise wisdom, and that they trust in their own strength.

Against the first (of these evils) he says that because they themselves are like beasts, it is appropriate that they be punished like beasts. Thus he say, *They are laid in hell like sheep.* Sheep are not naturally supplied by nature to defend themselves, and are thus exposed to slaughter - Psalm 43: "We are counted as sheep for the slaughter." Therefore, since the evil in hell are wholly exposed to punishment, they are thus like sheep - Jeremiah 12: "Gather them together as sheep for a sacrifice."

Again, sheep are shorn and those shorn are killed. Thus, they are first shorn of the wool of evil, (that is, they) are deprived or stripped of their external goods, and after this they are killed in hell, *Death shall feed upon them* - Apocalypse 21: "They shall have their portion in the pool burning with fire (and brimstone, which is the second death)."

*This (death) shall feed upon them:* and he says, *Shall feed upon them,* because although death inflicts punishment, nevertheless it does not completely remove it, but preserves it for the future.

Or, *Death,* that is the devil - Apocalypse 6: "(And behold a pale horse, and he that sat upon him) his name was Death (and hell followed after him) - *Shall feed upon them,* that is, he shall lead (them) from pasture to pasture, that is, from punishment to punishment - Job 24: "Let him pass from the snow waters to excessive heat (and his sin even to hell)."

Another version has, *Death shall be their shepherd.* And the psalmist speaks in this way. In this very life they are like the sheep deserving to be assigned to hell, and the devil is their shepherd.

*And they shall have dominion.* This is contrary to that which he said previously, that the wise are seen to die along with the foolish. Here, he says that *The just shall have dominion over them,* namely the evil. Or, the wise, who are called *The just...in the morning,* that is, on the day of judgment, when they will take up judicial power - Malachai 4: "And you shall tread down the wicked when they shall be ashes under the sole of your feet."

*And their help.* This is that which he has said, *And glory in the multitude of their riches.* It is as if he were saying, " *Their help,* which was from their friends and their riches, *shall decay*," that is, will perish in hell - Isaiah 10: "To whom will ye flee for help?" Job 6: "Behold there is no help for me."

*From their glory,* that is, along with their glory - Apocalypse 18: "As much as she hath glorified herself (and lived in delicacies, so much torment and sorrow give ye to her...)"

*But (God) will redeem my soul,* as if to say "The evil have those things, but I myself will be liberated from them." And by what (means)? By the shedding of Christ's blood. *He shall redeem (my soul) from the hand of hell,* that is, from the hand of the devil, under which men have been before Christ's advent - Hosea 13: "I will redeem them from death."

*When he shall receive me,* that is, when he shall receive my soul - Hebrews 2: "For no where doth he take hold of the angels: but of the seed of Abraham he taketh hold."

*Be not thou afraid.* Previously, the psalmist showed what should be feared by man in the world. Here, he shows what is not to be feared. First, he warns lest we should fear the prosperity of the wicked, and second, he assigns the reason, at, *For when he shall die.*

The prosperity of the wicked has two meanings, namely the abundance of riches, and the loftiness of renown. With respect to the former, he says, *Be not thou afraid, when a man shall be made rich,* and with respect to the latter, he says, *And when the glory of his house shall be increased.*

He says, *Man.* Man is established (exists) by reason of a two-fold nature, namely animal and rational. And at times, he is understood with respect to the one, and at other times, with respect to the other. Here, he is understood with respect to his animality, as if the psalmist is saying, "If a bestial man should become rich (do not take this amiss, for) such men often will become rich" - Job 21: "Why then do the wicked live, are they advanced, and strengthened with riches?" Again, at Job 12: "The tabernacles of robbers abound" - if you see such, *Be thou not afraid.*

The cause of fear can be two-fold, namely, that they not rave furiously at men, and second, that by this (fear) they not scandalize the good, and deflect them from hope, according to Psalm 72: "But my feet were almost moved...And I said: Then have I in vain justified my heart," as if to say, "on account of the fact that God does so much good for the evil, it would seem that he does not care for us," according to Malachai 3: "He laboureth in vain that serveth God, and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinances, and that we have walked sorrowful before the Lord of hosts?"

With respect to the other (way in which fear can be understood), he says, *And when the glory of his house shall be increased* - Ecclesiasticus 9: "Envy not the glory and riches of a sinner"; Psalm 36: "I have seen the wicked (highly exalted and lifted up like the cedars of Libanus).

*For when he shall die.* Here he assigns the reason why the evil, if they have become rich, are not to be feared. First, because at some point they will be stripped of all external goods, and second, that they will lose all interior goods as well. The latter (is discussed) at *For...his soul.*

Thus he says they are not to be feared since God reserves greater things for you. However, these things which are given to them are transitory. And he shows first that riches are passing, saying, *For when he shall die,* namely the rich man, *He shall take nothing away,* that is, from all the things that he possessed, he will be able to have not one thing. Job 27: "The rich man when he shall sleep shall take away nothing with him." 1 Timothy 6: "For we brought nothing into this world: and certainly we can carry nothing out."

Secondly, he shows the sinner's loss of man's glory (at) *Nor shall his glory descend with him.* For at that time his glory is terminated with his body, and shame in hell is reserved for him. Hosea 4: "I will change their glory into shame." Apocalypse 18: "(As much as) she hath glorified herself (and lived in delicacies, so much torment and sorrow give ye to her)."

*For in his lifetime his soul will be blessed: and he will praise thee when thou shalt do well to him.* Here, the psalmist describes, first, the interior loss pertaining to the body, and secondly, that which pertains to the soul, at, *And he shall go.* First, therefore, he shows that after this life, the good of the body is lost to them, and second, that whatever they have had of the good of virtue is ended.

Thus, he says, *For his soul.* Just as man is sometimes understood with respect to his animal nature, and at other times, with respect to his rational nature, so too the soul is understood in a two-fold way. At times, with respect to the rational life, as (it is so understood at) Deuteronomy 6 (where it is said) "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul." At other times, (it is understood) with respect to the animal (or sensitive) life: Luke 12: "(And I will say to) my soul: Soul, thou hast much goods (laid up for many years take thy rest; eat, drink, make good cheer)."

Therefore according to this he says, *For his soul,* that is, his animal (or sensitive) life, *In his lifetime will be blessed,* as if to say "Whatever he has of riches and glory, this is entirely in this life." And when this life ceases, he loses his glory; and in this way, in his own lifetime, he cannot benefit except while he is alive.

Again, sometimes sinners praise God, or do works of the class of good (works). However, if adversity threatens, he ceases his praise or the doing of good works. And thus he turns himself toward God saying: O God, *One* of that sort, namely a sinner, or someone existing in prosperity, *Will confess you*, that is, will praise you, W *hen thou shalt do well to him,* that is, when you have given to him temporal goods which he loves - Proverbs 10: "The blessing of the Lord maketh men rich."

Jerome has "They will praise you when they will have done well for themselves", that is to say, men praise and serve riches as long as they are present to and prosper in riches. However, if their fortune is changed, they are changed, and they do not yet praise but disparage these (riches).

*He shall go.* Here he states the loss of spiritual goods. And first he shows this loss, and second, describes the order of arriving at this very loss, at, *Man.* And first, he describes the loss as a result of guilt, and secondly, the punishment.

With respect to the first he says, *He shall go,* namely, the sinner himself as a rich man, whom all praise while it is well with him, *He shall go* I say *Into the generations of his fathers,* namely, through imitation, when he engages himself (in) all of the evils that his descendants effect - Matthew 23: "Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers." Jeremiah 11: "They are returned to the former iniquities of their fathers (who refused to hear my words)."

Or, *He shall go* etc. For his impious fathers are in hell, and he himself shall go there.

With respect to the second he says, *And he shall never see light.* For, as it were, here in his eternity, namely in this lifetime, he did not want to follow the light of reason, and thus will not see light eternal - Job 15: "He believeth not that he may return from darkness to light." Matthew 25: "And the unprofitable servant cast ye out into the exterior darkness."

For although he was endowed with the light of reason, as *A man established in honor,* he did not want to be ruled by that light, and *was made like unto the senseless beasts,* and thus as he acted as the beasts, he ought to be condemned to death.
