# Section 1 — Psalm 49

**The God of gods, the Lord hath spoken: and he hath called the earth. From the rising of the sun, to the going down thereof: out of Sion the loveliness of his beauty.**

**God shall come manifestly: our God *shall come,* and shall not keep silence. A fire shall burn before him: and a mighty tempest *shall* be round about him.**

**He shall call heaven from above, and the earth, to judge his people. Gather ye together his saints to him: who set his covenant before sacrifices. And the heavens shall declare his justice: for God is judge.**

**Hear, O my people, and I will speak: O Israel, and I will testify to thee: I am God, thy God.**

**I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices: and thy burnt offerings are always in my sight. I will not take calves out of thy house: nor he goats out of thy flocks. For all the beasts of the woods are mine: the cattle on the hills, and the oxen. I know all the fowls of the air: and with me is the beauty of the field. If I should be hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, and the fullness thereof.**

**Shall I eat the flesh of bullocks? or shall I drink the blood of goats?**

**Offer to God the sacrifice of praise: and pay your vows to the most High.**

**And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.**

**But to the sinner God hath said: Why dost thou declare my justices, and take my covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hast hated discipline: and hast cast my words behind thee. If thou didst see a thief thou didst run with him: and with adulterers thou hast been a partaker.**

**Thy mouth hath abounded with evil, and thy tongue framed deceits. Sitting thou didst speak against thy brother, and didst lay a scandal against thy mother's son: these things hast thou done, and I was silent. Thou thoughtest unjustly that I should be like to thee: *but* I will reprove thee, and set before thy face.**

**Understand these things, you that forget God; lest he snatch you *away,* and there be none to deliver you. The sacrifice of praise shall glorify me: and there is the way by which I will shew him the salvation of God.**

Previously, the psalmist invited the nations to trust in God. Here, he instructs them in the *cultus* of God. The psalm's title is "A psalm for Asaph." Asaph was one of the directors of the peoples' cantors, and of those who sang and praised (God) with cymbals, as is stated at I Paralipomenon 13, 16 and 25. This psalm is called "A psalm for Asaph" because it is sung by Asaph's ministry. (Asaph) is suited to the secret rites because (he) explains (such things) to the synagogue, and is thus the person selected for the synagogue.

When instructed concerning (matters relating to) sacrifices, one sets forth two things concerning the *cultus* of God, which precede divine justice: and this is first (namely, that which precedes divine judgment). Second is the discussion of God with the people concerning His *cultus,* at "Hear, O my people."

Three things precede judgment, namely the judge's summons, his arrival, and the preparation. And so, he first sets down the summons, second, (his) arrival, at, *Our God shall come manifestly,* and third, the preparation, at, *A fire shall burn before him.* Concerning the first he does three things. First, he shows who is the one issuing the summons, second, to whom the summons is issued, at, *And he hath called,* and third, in what order they are summoned, at, *Out of Sion.*

He who summons is great, because He is *God* of all things, even *of gods.* Hence, the psalmist says, *The God of gods, the Lord hath spoken.* He thus is first commended on account of the excellence of his nature. For He is *The God of gods,* and is not an angel. Jerome has, *Powerful God.*

But are there many gods? 1 Corinthians 8 states "For there be gods many, and lords many."

"God" is said in a three-fold way. First, naturally. And that (God) is one God alone: Deuteronomy 6: "Hear, O Israel, the Lord your God is one." Second, by way of participation. And those (gods) are many, (as) 1 Corinthians 8 (makes clear). Finally, by way of appellation and conjecture, as with idols and stars, like Venus and Saturn respectively: Psalm 95: "All the gods of the Gentiles are devils."

However, some gods can be spoken of (as "God") in four ways. First, by way of union. And thus, Christ alone is called God: John 20: "My Lord and my God." Some (are called "God") by way of the grace of adoption: Psalm 81: "I have said: You are gods..." Others (are called "God") by way of a participation of the divine power in the performing of miracles: Exodus 7: "I have appointed thee the God of Pharaoh." Finally, there are those (who are called "God") by way of (their) ministry, as the judges were so called at Exodus 22: "Thou shalt not speak ill of the gods."

Again, He is commended on account of his governance, when (the Psalmist) says *The Lord hath spoken.* He has spoken here internally by means of inspiration (Psalm 84: "I will hear what the Lord God will speak in me"),

and also by means of external expression (Hebrews 1: "In these days (God) hath spoken to us" etc.).

*And he hath called the earth,* namely, the universe, that is, all of those who dwell upon earth. Hence, they have been summoned, not just some from the midst of the world, but *From the rising of the sun, to the going down thereof;* Mark 16: "Go ye into the whole world" etc.; Jeremiah 16: "To thee the Gentiles shall come from the ends of the earth, and shall say: Surely (our fathers have possessed) lies" etc.

The order of summons is set down when (the Psalmist) says, *Out of Sion the loveliness of his beauty;* (it is) as if he were saying, "This summons finds its beginnings in Sion" (see Isaiah 2: "The law shall come forth from Sion"). For when the Apostles received the Holy Spirit, they were in Sion. They were then made strong to go out into the world. Therefore, *Out of Sion,* where the Apostles were, *The loveliness of his beauty* began to be spread (among the people).

But in a certain manner Chirst began to be well divulged (to the Apostles). But his aspect was not seen, because it was enclosed by his infirmity; we see him (here) as the most unfamiliar of men, a man of sorrows, as is related in Isaiah 53. But after his passion his excellence and power were apparent.

*God shall come manifestly.* Here, (the Psalmist) treats of (the judge's) arrival. And he says two things concerning the second coming in opposition to two things which were present at (His) first (coming). At (His) first coming, God came hidden in the infirmity of (our) humanity; Ezechial 32: "I will cover the sun with a cloud", and Isaiah 45: "Verily thou art a hidden God." But (at (His) second coming), he will be made manifest; Apocalypse 1: "Behold, he cometh (with the clouds), and every eye shall see him"; 2 Thessalonians 2: "...whom the Lord Jesus shall kill with the spirit of his mouth; and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming..."

Again, in (His) first coming, He shows (His) gentleness; Isaiah 53: "He is led as a sheep to the slaughter." Hence, he said nothing in the presence of rulers, priests and Pilate. But at (the time of his second coming), he will not be silent, but will speak; Isaiah 42: "I have always held my peace, I have kept silence, I have been patient" when I was judged in the courts, and endured evil things; "but I will shout out like a woman in labor."

And he says, *Our,* as if to say, "No other God than our God, He who comes, beyond whom there is no salvation."

Jerome's version begins the line (as follows): *From Sion God will appear in perfect beauty,* as if to say, "God will appear from Sion, which is in the perfect beauty of (His) holy Spirit."

With respect to (His) first (coming, the Psalmist) adds, *God shall come manifestly.* With respect to (His) second (coming), *A fire shall burn before him.* At this point, he sets down the preparation for (His) comming.

Rulers arrange for insignias and swords to be brought before them; Romans 13: "For he beareth not the sword in vain," as if he were saying that they have the power of passing sentence. And so, signs of vengeance and ministers of judgment precede (the coming of) Christ. Therefore, (the Psalmist) first sets down the signs and instruments of vengeance, and secondly shows (His) power as far as concerns (His) ministers, at, *He shall call.*

The instrument of divine judgment is two-fold. The first is primarily in relation to the punishing fire, the second in relation to fighting against the foolishness of all creatures - see Wisdom 5. With respect to the first, he says, *A fire shall burn before him.* Literally considered, the fire will precede him, as is stated at Hebrews 10, since the destroying fire will burn and cleanse the face of the earth, (burn and cleanse) whatever is to be cleansed in the good, and, finally, descend upon the evil in hell.

Or *(A fire shall burn before him* can be understood as) the fire of a gnawing conscience; Isaiah 50: "Walk in the light of your fire."

With respect to (His) second (coming), the Psalmist says, *And a mighty tempest shall be round about him,* which arises from the commotion of all the elements before the judgment; Luke 21: "And there shall be signs in the sun" etc. And there shall be such a great commotion that even the heavenly bodies will be moved. *Tempest,* that is, (God's) indignation, *shall be round about him,* that is, about the saints who will be round him; Isaiah 13: "to destroy sinners"; Job 27: "Poverty like water shall take hold on him"; Proverbs 1: "When sudden calamity shall fall upon you."

*He shall call heaven from above.* Having set forth the coming of the judge to the judgement, and the preparation of the judge with respect to (His) instruments of punishment, the psalmist sets forth here the preparation of the judge with respect to (His) ministers. And first he treats of the assistance of his ministers, second, of the angels' duty, at, *Gather ye together,* and third, of the apostles' duty, at, *It shall be declared.*

In the first part, the Psalmist makes mention of heaven and earth, which can be understood in a two-fold way. First, so that by a metonymy the container be understood in place of [or standing for] the contained. And so, by *Heaven* the Psalmist designates the holy who are in the heavens. And it is these very people who are all summoned to judgment. This is the second summons, since the Psalmist said previously (that) *He hath called the earth.* That particular summons was a call to faith, to which all, good and bad, are called; Matthew 13: "The kingdom of heaven is like to a net cast into the sea," etc. But this second summons is with the purpose of separation, that they gather the good into His vessels, but cast the evil out of them. Thus, he says, *To judge his people,* by the separation of the good from the evil; Matthew 25: "He shall separate the sheep from the goats"; Psalm 42: "Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause."

However, the heavens are summoned in a different fashion from the earth. For the men of heaven are called to be like judges; Matthew 19: "You who have left all things" etc., including the tribe of Israel. The men of earth are called that they may be judged; Joel 3: "I will gather together all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Josaphat."

Or, He summons the *Heaven*, that is, the heavenly, or the just, to their reward; Daniel 12: "They that are learned shall shine as the brightness of the firmament" etc. And the *Earth,* that is, the earthly, or evil, he summons to their punishment.

There can also be another sense, namely that *Heaven* and *Earth* are asserted for corporeal creatures themselves. And so, they are summoned by way of their testimony or impugnment against the faithless, because by (their) testimony and impugnment, the wicked can have attention drawn to them out of heaven and earth; Job 20: "The heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against him," namely the sinner.

Or, *He shall call heaven from above,* so that he might admit into it the souls of the holy whom he holds, *And the earth,* that he might admit the souls of the evil whom he binds into the abyss. Jerome's version agrees with this (interpretation). It says, "Gather unto me all my saints," as if to say, "For this reason does he summon, that he might display His saints."

*Gather ye together his saints to him.* This is the duty of the angels, namely that they gather the elect in judgment; Matthew 24: "And he shall send his angels...(and they shall gather together his elect...). This voice (speaking at this point in the psalm) is of the prophet Daniel (directed) to the angels who were sent to (God's) ministers. For (the latter) are *His saints who set his covenant before sacrifices.*

The word "before" can be taken in two ways. First, to designate the order of the material cause. And then, the sense of *Before sacrifices* (would be that the covenant is set before) those who made the pact with God concerning the sacrifices being offered. He made mention of sacrifices for two reasons. First, because there will be an inquiry following concerning sacrifices, and second, because the inquiry during the judgement will only be with the faithful who will be judged. And these are the one who have made a pact with God in sacrifices.

The second way in which the word "before" can be taken is as it indicates a going beyond. And in this way it should be said that by *Covenant* is understood the new covenant, which surpasses (the old). This, then, is the sense of *Before sacrifices,* namely, (that the covenant is set before) those who prefer the new covenant to the sacrifices of the old covenant.

Or, *Covenant* (can be understood as that which was) promised by God. In this way, (the sense of) *Before sacrifices,* (is) namely that (the covenant is set before he) who considers the goods promised by God to be greater than all of our merits; Romans 8: "For I reckon that the sufferings of this time (are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come)."

Or, by *Covenant* (is meant that) this soul has a bond with justice, mercy, faith, and other such things; Hosea 2: "And I will espouse thee to me in faith." And so, they are *Before sacrifices,* that is, those who prefer spiritual goods of this sort to corporeal sacrifices; Hosea 6: "I desired mercy, and not sacrifice."

Or, those *Who set his covenant* etc., that is those who, in the sacrifices which they offer to God, have a relation to God according to the covenant. For they refer the good things that they do to another, so that they may be gathered into him; 1 Corinthians 10: "Do all to the glory of God."

*The heavens shall declare.* The duty of the apostles is to declare. And these men are designated by the heavens. Hence, *The heavens,* that is, the apostles, *shall declare justice* in God. *The heavens* are indicated because they themselves are prominent in all the choruses of the holy, and they illuminate the entire church; Psalm 18: "The heavens shew forth the glory of God."

But *They shall declare* *that God is judge* through teaching doctrine; Acts 10: "(And he commanded us to preach to the people,) and to testify that it is he who was appointed by God to be judge of the living and of the dead"; 2 Corinthians 5: "For we must all be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ."

In another way, they shall declare by means of a judge's authority, promulgating a sentence against the evil when they will sit upon the twelve seats (of judgment), as is said at Matthew 19.

*Hear.* Here, the psalmist treats of the dispute of judgment. With respect to this, three things are necessary. One thing is sought on our part, another on God's part, and finally the third is the dispute itself. On our part, one seeks to hear not only something exterior to the body (with respect to those things which are heard corporally), but (one) also (seeks to hear something) within; Ecclesiasticus 6: "If thou love to hear (thou shalt be wise)." Thus he says, *Hear,* that is, listen also within; Matthew 13: "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."

*O my people,* because he who is not of his people, do not hear him; John 6: "Everyone that hath heard of my Father." Again, at John 8: "Therefore you hear them (the words of God) not, because you are not of God."

On God's part speech and testimony are sought after. And so, he says, *And I will speak: O Israel, and I will testify to thee.* Now God's speech is two-fold. On the one hand, it is external by way of (His) preachers; Hebrews 1: "God (who, at sundry times and divers manners,) spoke in time past to the fathers by the prophets..." On the other, it is interior by way of (His) inspiration; Psalm 84: "(I will hear) what the Lord God will speak in me..."

Likewise, (His) testimony is two-fold. First, it is by way of miracles; John 5: "The works themselves, which I do, give testimony of me." Second, by way of witnesses; Isaiah 44: "You are my witnesses"; Acts 1: "You shall be witnesses unto me" etc. And in this way, these witnesses can be the words of Christ instructing the people. *Hear, O my people, and I will speak: O Israel, and I will testify to thee,* by way of miracles; John 5: "The works which the Father hath give me to perfect." Again, in the same chapter: "Search the scriptures." And in this way I speak by way of miracles and the scriptures, that is, it will become apparent that by way of the scriptures, I speak the truth, and that I am true. And what will I testify? *I am God, thy God,* namely singly; Exodus 20: "I am the Lord." And he says, *I am,* on account of (His) eternity, which does not decrease either in the past or in the future. And he says, *Thy God,* because (they are) of the seed of Abraham; Romans 9: "Of whom is Christ, according to the flesh."

*I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices.* Here, the psalmist treats of the dispute itself, concerning which he does three things. First, he rejects the old sacrifice, second, introduces the new, at, *Offer to God,* and third, repels the evil by means of this sacrifice, at, *To the sinner.* Sacrifices are professions of faith. And so, about to set (this) before the face of God, the psalmist puts forth concerning the faith of one God. First, sets forth his intention, and second, he supplies the reason (for it).

Thus, he says, "I will come and judge, and *I will not reprove thee for they sacrifices,* which you have not neglected.

But on the contrary, (it may be said that) he who neglected (to perform the sacrifices he should have) at that time, erred, and that he will be brought to judgment for every error, as is said in Ecclesiasticus 12.

I respond that a man complains when he does not do the will of (his) superior. But the will of God is your sanctification; see 1 Thessalonians 4. But this sacrifice does not contribute to your sanctity. Hence, (these sacrifices) are not willed by God for themselves, but as a sign of another thing (and so, he says in Hosea 6: "I desired mercy, and not sacrifice"), and of an interior virtue. And in this way, they are reproved concerning (these) virtutes as such, which they did not exercise, and not concerning the sacrifices (themselves).

(Next,) he makes the reason (for his intent) clear. (He does this) first on their part, and secondly on his own part. Hence he says, *Thy burnt offerings are always in my sight,* as if to say, "I will not reprove you for (your) sacrifices, because you were prompt to offer carnal sacrifices, and have freely offered sacrifices for this reason, namely that they were delighted in them [namely, the sacrifices of animal flesh] in their communal meals; Isaiah 22: "And behold joy (and gladness), killing sacrifices" etc.

Or again, *I will not reprove thee for thy* carnal *sacrifices,* because *Thy burnt* spiritual *offerings are always in my sight,* that is, they please me. And, as Gregory says, these (offerings) are (made) when all is offered up to God, namely, he himself who offers and all that he has. In this way, he expends (himself) in the service of God.

On God's part, the psalmist makes the reason (of God's intent) clear) when he says, *I will not take calves out of thy house.* The reason why *I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices* is that concerning those things which I do not principally seek, I do not principally reprove you for. Now there were two principal kinds of sacrifices, namely the calf and the goat (see Leviticus 4). And he appears not to accept either, that is, to receive (*calves* or) carnal things *from thy house* (or *goats*) *from thy flocks;* Micheas 6: "May the Lord be appeased with thousands of rams?"

*For all the beasts of the woods are mine.* Here, he proves what he has said, namely that neither favors calves nor goats, and that if he stands in need (of them), that he would not take (them) from his house - no one asks for something which is in his power; whatever they offered, these things were in the power of God.

Three things were offered (to God) in the old testament: four-footed animals, birds and fruit, namely the best or first fruits and bread. With respect to the first (offering) he says, *All the beasts of the woods are mine.* Four-footed animals are divided into two categories. There are those which are wild, and those which are domesticated. And although the wild are not offered, the psalmist enumerates them so that it is more evident that even the domesticated (animals) are His.

Mystically (speaking), different kinds of people can be designated by these very animals. And so, he says (those) *Of the wood,* that is, the infidels, *The cattle,* that is, the faithful, *The oxen on the mountains,* that is, the apostles, *Are all mine.*

With respect to the second he says, *I know all the fowls of the air,* that is, these very creatures are under my providence. By *Fowls* are to be understood the holy angels, who are a likeness (to them, namely the fowls).

With respect to the third he says, *And with me is the beauty of the field,* that is, Whatsoever is beautiful in these things, serves me.

Or, *With me is the beauty of the field,* since I am everywhere. And because "I always am", He is without past and future.

*If I should be hungry, I would not tell thee.* He concludes by means of the impossible. "If I were lacking these things, I would not tell you," that is, I would not seek (them) from you. Why? Because *The world is mine, and the fullness thereof;* Psalm 23: "The earth is the Lord's" etc.

*Shall I eat?* Previously, the psalmist assigned, on the Lord's part, the reason why the Lord would not accept goats, even if he needed them. Here, however, he shows that he does not need (them).

It must be noted that in the law, it is set forth that the flesh of the offerings be consumed by flame, and the blood be poured be upon the base of the altar. Now someone could suppose that God takes pleasure in the blood and flesh of those creatures. This, according to Augustine, was the opinion of the gentiles, namely that their gods took pleasure in the odor of flesh and the shedding of blood.

Now the Lord says that he does not take pleasure in those things which in themselves do not delight. Thus, he says, *Shall I eat the flesh of bullocks? or shall I drink the blood of goats?* It is as if (the psalmist) were saying "No (I shall not partake of such) because I do not stand in need (of these), nor do I take pleasure (in them). For I take pleasure in those things which in themselves are food (so to speak) for God. But the flesh and blood of animals is different from this food. For food for God is that which is food of all of the holy; Luke 22: "I dispose to you, as (my Father hath disposed to me, a kingdom; that you may eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom..."). In this way, the refreshment of the holy, and refreshment for God are the same. But the holy are refreshed by the love of God Himself. And so God is refreshed in the enjoyment of Himself; Tobias 12: "(I seemed indeed to eat and to drink with you:) but I use an invisible meat and drink, which cannot be seen by men."

*Offer to God.* Here, the psalmist shows which that sacrifice is which God accepts. And he shows first God accepts from man, and second, what he returns.

The Lord requires two things from man. First, a sacrifice of praise. And *A sacrifice of praise* is said because a sacrifice is nothing other than a profession of interior devotion and faith. For by a sacrifice we recognize God as the creator of all things; 1 Paralipomenon 29: "All things are thine; and we have given thee what we received of thy hand."

In his book, *On Christian Doctrine,* Augustine states that there is no sign signifying as clearly both the heart's intent as does the word and exterior faith; and devotion cannot be better revealed than by the devotion of praise. And so, praise is accepted more by God that the killing of animals; Hebrews 13: "By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise always to God"; Hosea 14: "(Take with you words, and return to the Lord, and say to him: Take away all iniquity, and receive the good:) and we will render the calves of our lips."

The second thing that the Lord requires from man is that he render vows to the most high. And so, he says, *And pay your vows to the most High.* Praise is a sacrifice to God insofar as it is a sign of interior devotion. For praise indicates that man offers his very mind to God. And God wants that this be rendered to him; it is a vow, and as it is a vow, it is an act of adoration; Isaiah 19: "They shall worship him with sacrifices and offerings: and they shall make vows to the Lord, and perform them"; Ecclesiastes 5: "If thou hast vowed any thing to God, defer not to pay it."

*And call.* At this point, the Lord sets forth what he will return to those who honor him. First, he shows what the holy suffer, secondly, what they do in times of trial, third, what they receive from God, and fourth, what they pay back to Him.

And so, he says that although one pays his vows, he is nevertheless afflicted; Psalm 68: "My enemies...have wrongfully persecuted me." The reason for this is that unless the just are afflicted in this world, many will serve God not on His account alone, but rather for the sake of prosperity.

Next, he shows what they do in times of tribulation, namely that they ought to call upon Him: *And you will call upon me.* What will God do for him? He will free him, *I will deliver thee;* Psalm 119: "In my trouble I cried to the Lord" etc. And after He has freed him, he ought to honor God, *And thou shalt glorify me.*

*But to the sinner God hath said.* At this point, he prevents certain people, namely sinners, from (making) a sacrifice of praise. He sets down three things (in this regard). First, the perversity of man, second, the patience of God, and third, he threatens the divine severity.

Human perversity consists in this, namely that they say good things, but do evil. And so, he shows how they are unworthy to say good things. However, good speech is two-fold. One kind is the instruction of morals, and the other is of forming one in the praise of God.

And so, he says, *You,* namely my people, *Offer to God the sacrifice of praise.* But *To the sinner God says,* that is, it is fixed by God through preordination, that this is unjust, that he say good things, but do evil. And he says this because it is in the mind of all, even impressed in the mind of sinners. And what did he say? *Why dost thou declare my justices;* Romans 2: "That thou preachest that men should not steal, stealest."

But does one, who is in a state of mortal sin, sin mortally [that is, sin again, a new sin], if he should preach or teach?

It must be said that his sin is either public or private. If it is private, either it is from contempt and without penance, or it is with penance. Therefore, is must be said that if one's sin is public, one ought not to preach or teach publically. And I say this because if one's sin is not public, one could, with love and in private, find fault with one's brother for a sin lesser than one's own which also is private, by finding fault with oneself. If, however, one is in sin privately, and without penance, then he provokes God, because (such a person) feigns (goodness); Proverbs 11: "The dissembler with his mouth deceiveth his friend. These matters are spoken of here, as Augustine's Gloss indicates, (namely that) it is not the priviledge of the one whose conscience contradicts him to praise with the tongue. If, however, the sin is private and (the sinner) is sorry for it, he does not sin by preaching or teaching, even if the speaks publicly against sin. For just as he detests the sins of others, so too does he despise his own.

*And take my covenant in thy mouth.* Justice is referred to instruction, and covenant to faith's praise; Ecclesiasticus 15: "Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner." For the name of God is most holy, and as such it is unseemly that such be assumed, or usurped as it were, by sinners; Proverbs 26: "As a lame man hath fair legs in vain: so a parable is unseemly in the mouth of fools."

*Seeing thou hast hated discipline.* Here, the psalmist sets forth the evil things which sinners do. The evil they do is twofold. First, they hate divine correction. Hence, he says *Seeing thou hast hated discipline.* The correction of (one's) practices is done with difficulty; Hebrew 12: "All chastisement for the present indeed seemeth not to bring with it joy, but sorrow." This, the evil hate; Hebrews 12: "But if you be without chastisement (whereof all are made partakers, then are you bastards, and not sons)"; Psalm 118: "(Teach me) goodness and discipline (chastisement)"; Amos 5: "They have hated him that rebuketh in the gate."

Therefore, you do not want to be corrected by others when you do wrong daily, *And hast cast my words behind thee,* by which you are formed so that you might act well and be found deserving. Such *Words* ought to be held in reverence. But these people, namely sinners, do not accept or (even) consider them; Ezechiel 33: "They hear thy words, and do them not: for they turn them into a song of their mouth (and their heart goeth after their covetousness)."

Or, *Thou hast cast,* that is, you held (them, my words) as though (they were) nothing, (these, thou hast cast) *Behind thee,* in such a fashion that you would also not consider them.

*If thou didst see a thief thou didst run with him.* Here, the psalmist sets down the wickedness of sinners with respect to (their) performance of evil. But a little before (this), he set forth their failure with respect to (their) abandonment of good when he said, *Seeing thou hast hated* etc. He first describes their wickedness with respect to the evil of (their) work, and then to that of (their) mouth.

And so, he says, *If thou didst see.* It should be noted here that these words are applied (by the psalmist) on God's part to sinners announcing and preaching of God's justice. And (this, namely this condition of being in sin while announcing and preaching) applies most to prelates and teachers (of the Christian faith) who are not easily brought to sin, but who consent to other people sinning, and these [sins of other people] fall on their heads; Romans 1: "...they who do such things, are worthy of death; and not only they that do them (but they also that consent to them that do them)"; and 1 Kings 3 (wherein) Heli is punished, he who did not correct his sons by way of reprimanding them.

The psalmist touches upon two things, namely theft and adultery. With respect to the first, he says, *If thou didst see a thief,* (if) brought to you for judgment, *thou didst run with him,* by not correcting him; Isaiah 1: "Thy princes are faithless."

Again, *With adulterers thou hast been a partaker,* because you have not corrected adulterers, but have flattered, cooperated with and favored them, when they came to your notice; Jeremiah 9: "They are all adulterers."

Spiritually (speaking), theft occurs when a corruptor steals the true understanding from the words of Sacred Scripture. And thus, seeing the corrupting and concealment of (its) true meaning, and consenting (to it), *Thou runs with him;* Jeremiah 23: "Behold I am against the prophets... who steal my words..."

Adultery, in the spiritual sense, occurs when the words (of Sacred Scripture) are twisted into another sense, or to some other end, for instance, if one were to preach something for the sake of gain or seduction; 2 Corinthians 2: "We are not as many, adulterating the word of God."

*Thy mouth.* At this point, the psalmist treats of mouth's sin, which is made worse in two ways. First, by way of the circumstance, and second, by way of the person's condition, at, *Sitting.* Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he puts forth the aggravating conditions, namely that of frequency and deceit.

Frequency (is an aggravating condition) because if at some point one were to commit a sin, this, in a way, is tolerable. Or, if by a slip in one's speech, one says something inordinate, it is more easily endured; James 3: "If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man." However, if one fills one's mouth with evil speech, then one acts from wickedness proper: for the mouth speaks from the fullness of one's heart - see Matthew 12 and Psalm 13: "Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness."

The sin of speech is also aggravated by way of deceit or fraud; Jeremiah 9: "Their tongue is a piercing arrow, it hath spoken deceit." And thus he says, *And thy tongue framed,* that is, composed, *deceits,* as if the one teaching arranged his deceits, so that his words would be pleasing; Proverbs 12: "He that is a hasty witness, frameth a lying tongue."

*Sitting thou didst speak against thy brother.* At this point, the Psalmist shows how the sin of speech is aggravated by peoples' condition, and (this) first by the condition of the one speaking, second, by the condition of him against whom he speaks, and third, by the condition of those listening.

And so, he says, *Sitting.* At times, it is appropriate that one who has been agitated and provoked speak an unpleasant word. And this is tolerable in one way or another. But when one in peace of heart, and who has not been provoked, speaks evil things, this is wicked and detestable. And so he says, *Sitting,* namely, peace; Psalm 68: "They that sat in the gate spoke against me."

Sin is aggravated on account of the person of him against whom he speaks. For if one spoke against evil things, one would not be so [evil]. But he says *Against thy brother;* Jeremiah 9: "Let every man take heed of (his) neighbor."

*And didst lay a scandal against thy mother's son.* Here, the psalmist shows how (sin) is aggravated on the part of those who are scandalized by this, namely those who listening. And thus he says, *Thou didst lay a scandal,* that is, of different things against your brother. And when he says, *Against thy mother's son,* he shows that children at the breast are called a *mother's sons,* and that little ones are scandalized by the evil words which he (the one voicing scandal) says.

*These things hast thou done, and I was silent.* Here, the psalmist treats of God's assumed appearance. First he describes God's concealment, and secondly, this concealment's effect in evil people, at, *Thou thoughtest.* And so, he says, *These things hast thou done,* namely everything which was said above: you spoke good things, but have brought about evil, and, as the psalmist speaks in the manner of God's person, *I was silent,* as if to say, I did not immediately correct and punish you, but out of clemency and compassion I waited for you to make penance; Isaiah 42: "I have always held my peace, I have kept silence"; Romans 2: "Or... knowest thou not, that the benignity of God leadeth thee to penance?" But the evil man and the sinner abuse this clemency in (their) pride; Romans 2: "But according to thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up to thyself wrath..." And so, he says, *Thou thoughtest unjustly that I should be like to thee.*

However, it was said above, *If thou didst see a thief* etc. Sinners argue in this manner, and the wicked believe that sin pleases God, and that He does not punish, because he remains silent - *These things hast thou done, and I was silent.*

But this way of thinking is wicked, since the impious and their impiety are hateful to God alike, as is said at Wisdom 14 and, again, at Habacuc 1: "Thy eyes are too pure to behold evil, and thou canst not look on iniquity."

*But I will reprove thee.* And so, at this point, the divine guarantee, so to speak, is set down, first, in His reprimand, and second, in its effects. And so, he says, *I will reprove thee,* that is, I will condemn you; Psalm 6: "O Lord...chastise me not in thy anger." The effect is in His anger, *And set before thy face.* God punishes not only through Himself, but also by means of other creatures; Wisdom 5: "And the whole world shall fight with him against the unwise."

Again, even man himself fights against himself by means of the remorse of conscience. And even in this way, he fights against himself and argues with himself. This is what the psalmist says, *Set* yourself *before thy face,* that is, you will condemn yourself; John 8: "(Woman, where are they that accused thee?) Hath no man condemned thee? (Who said) No man, Lord. (And Jesus said) Neither will I condemn thee."

Or, *Set before thy face,* namely creatures, as is said at Wisdom 5.

Or, rational beings, that is, the angels and the saints;

or irrational beings, whose bad use lies in sins; Job 7: "(Why) hast thou set me opposite to thee, and I am become burdensome to myself(?)"; Wisdom 5: "We have erred from the way of truth"; Nahum 3: "I will discover thy shame to thy face"; Isaiah 3: "The shew of their countenance hath answered them." And this punishment is the worm of conscience.

*Understand these things, you that forget God.* At this point, the psalmist urges one to a consideration of one's sins. First, (he urges that we) consider God's severity. Second, he shows what is accepted by God in sacrifices.

And so, he first urges one to understand; hence he says, *Understand these things, you that forget God,* namely consider those things which have been said. And this is necessary because you have forgotten God; Deuteronomy 32: "Thou hast forgotten the God that created thee." Second, let him understand what (has been said) *Lest he snatch you away,* that is to say, the devil, *And there be none to deliver you,* that is, from his power. When the devil carries one off to the punishment of hell, there is no one to deliver you. Sometimes, the devil carries one off to sin, but God snatches back even the sinner; Psalm 90: "He (I) will deliver him." When he does not snatch one from the devil's power to punish, this is not from a lack of power (on God's part), but rather that he does not desire (to do this) on account of His justice.

*The sacrifice of praise shall glorify me.* At this point, the psalmist concludes (with) what is accepted by God in sacrifices. And he shows that there are two fruits in these sacrifices. The first fruit is on God's part, that His excellence is clearly shown. And this is accomplished through the sacrifice of vocal praise; 1 Corinthians 10: "Do all to the glory of God." The other fruit is on our part, namely true deliverance from our sins; hence he says, *And there is the way by which I will shew him the salvation of God,* that is the living God; Isaiah 52: "They have lifted up their voice, they shall praise together."

Jerome has, *And to he who goes about in an orderly manner, I will shew him the salvation of God;* as if to say, two things are necessary for deliverance from sin, that is, the sacrifice of praise, and that you go about in an orderly manner.
