# Section 1 — Psalm 50

**When Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had sinned with Bersabee.**

**PSALM 50 OF DAVID**

**Have mercy on me, O God, according to thy great mercy. And according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my iniquity. Wash me yet more from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.**

**For I know my iniquity, and my sin is always before me. To thee only have I sinned, and have done evil before thee: that thou mayest be justified in thy words, and mayest overcome when thou are judged.**

**For behold I was conceived in iniquities; and in sins did my mother conceive me. For behold thou has loved truth.**

**The uncertain and hidden things of they wisdom thou hast made manifest to me. Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed: thou shalt wash me, and I shall be made whiter than snow.**

**To my hearing thou shalt give joy and gladness: and the bones that have been humbled shall rejoice.**

**Turn away thy face from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities. Create a clean heart in me, O God: and renew a right spirit within my bowels. Cast me not away from thy face; and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of they salvation, and strengthen me with a perfect spirit.**

**I will teach the unjust thy ways: and the wicked shall be converted to thee. Deliver me from blood, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my tongue shall extol thy justice. O Lord, thou wilt open my lips: and my mouth shall declare thy praise.**

**For if thou hadst desired sacrifice, i would indeed have given it: with burnt offerings thou wilt not be delighted. A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit: a contrite and humbled heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.**

**Deal favourably, O Lord, in thy good will with Sion; that the walls of Jerusalem may be built up. Then shalt thou accept the sacrifice of justice, oblations and whole burnt offerings: then shall they lay calves upon thy altar.**

In the foregoing Psalms of this decade, the Psalmist is seen to have dealt with those things that pertain to the state of the Kingdom, whose glory he described and invited others to it: now, however, because the glory of this Kingdom is impeded through sin, he deals with the abolishment of sin: whence two things must be considered.

First, that in the numbering of the Psalms, this Psalm is the fiftieth and this is the number of jubilee as is described in Leviticus 27 in which a remission of all debts was made, whence this number agrees with this Psalm in which he treats of full remission of sins.

Similarly, as to the Penitential Psalms, this one is placed fourth, and suitably. For the first pertains to contrition of heart: whence he says (Psalm 6) *Every night I will wash my bed.* The second pertains to the confession by mouth (Psalm 31) *I said I will confess against myself my injustice to the Lord.* The third pertains to satisfaction; whence he says (Psalm 37) *I am afflicted and humbled exceedingly.* This fourth one, however, pertains to the purpose of repentance, in which it is shown how repentance restores man to perfection; and therefore, among all the other Psalms, this one is more often repeated in Church because it alone beseeches mercy and thus it obtains favour; and this is easy and caan be suitable for anyone.

Now in the other six Penitential Psalms there are certain burdensome things such as (Psalm 6) *Every night I will wash my bed.* And (Psalm 101) *I did eat ashes like bread and mingled my drink with weeping,* which cannot be suitable for anyone.

Such is the title: *A Psalm of David when Nathan the prophet came to him when he had sinned with Bersabee.* This story is contained expressly in Chapters 11 and 12 of 2 Kings. When David was in prosperity, he saw a woman bathing herself and he greatly desired her and caused the death of her husband. And this was displeasing to God and the prophet Nathan was sent to him and brought him back to hatred for his sin, under the image of a lost sheep. And David said, "I have sinned against the Lord." And the sin was forgiven him. And this is the matter of this Psalm, namely, the forgiveness of sins.

But it must be understood in the title of this Psalm that David speaks of other things in Psalms, as where (Psalm 21) he says *O God, my God,* foretelling the passion of Christ; and so in different Psalms he speaks of different things. But he made this Psalm for his very own account: in which he shows his fault, which he made manifest to the world and similarly his pardon and thus they will have fulfilled that which the Lord said in 2 Kings 12, "For thou didst it secretly, but I will make this thing manifest."

Now the reason for this manifestation is divine mercy. For this manifestation is useful for the righteous in order that they not presume on their own righteousness, for if David, after so many victories, after the gift of the Holy Spirit, after such a great intimacy with God and prophecy did sin, how much more ought we to beware, we who are frail and sinners? 1 Corinthians 10 "He that thinketh himself to stand, let him take heed lest he fall." Also it is profitable for sinners lest they despair. Proverbs 24 "If thou lose hope being weary in the day of distress, thy strength shall be diminished." For David, after murder and adultery recovered the grace of prophecy.

Now the manner of speaking in the title, *When Nathan came,* must be noted: where it designates pardon about which he is moved in the Psalm because through it the Lord heard him and bore away his sin; but when he says, *When he sinned with Bersabee,* guilt is designated. Whence two things have been shown. The first which he calls guilt when he says, And he sinned. Psalm 11 "The words of the Lord are pure words."

Also, although he had committed two sins, namely adultery and murder, Scripture names adultery and that for two reason. First, in order to designate that in examining and making public the sins of others, we be not quick, but exceedingly sparing. Proverbs 24: "Lie not in wait, nor seek after wickedness in the house of the just." And this is indicated by Matthew 25 where the Lord reckons up carefully the merits of the good, he has passed over the desserts of the bad. Likewise it should be noted that when anyone commits two sins and does one for the sake of the other, the one passes over into the likeness of the other, as one who commits theft in order to fornicate is called above all a fornicator.

And this psalm is divided into two parts: indeed in the first he beseeches mercy; in the second, he promises correction, where he says, *I will teach the unjust.* About the first he does two things. One, he seeks mitigation of guilt; two, he seeks the restoriation of holiness and grace where he says, *For my iniquity.*

Therefore, he seeks first the mercy of God when he says: *Have mercy on me, O God.* Whence it must be known that, as it is said in Proverbs 14, "sin maketh nations miserable." Indeed, just as he is not truly happy who abounds in riches, delights in pleasures, possesses honours in abundance, but he who delights in God; so, he is not miserable who is poor, wretched and feeble and weak, but he who is a sinner; and therefore the one who is a sinner says: *Have mercy on me, O God,* Thou, namely who "hast mercy upon all and hatest none of the things which thou hast made" (Wisdom 11) and, according to the Apostle, you have mercy on whom you wish. Romans 9 "I shall have mercy on whom I wish." Therefore, if to have mercy exists under your will, *Have mercy on me,* plainly, a sinner.

He does not wish to contend, he does not seek to dispute, but he makes use of a brief way, *Have mercy.* Likewise, he does not adduce as a cause ofr mercy, either the services he has done for God, or the dangers he has sustained for him; but he only implores the mercy of God, whence he says, *According to thy great mercy.* Daniel 9 "For it is not for our justifications that we present our prayers before thy face, but for the multitude of thy tender mercies."

And it must be noted that anyone can hope on divine mercy with a two-fold reason. One reason is from reflection, and according to the multitude of his accomplishments.

First, therefore, he shows that he hopes on the mercy of God from reflection on the divine nature, for it is a characteristic of the divine nature that it be goodness itself. Whence Dionysius says that God is the very substance of goodness. And likewise, Boethius On the Trinity. Whence this mercy of God is nothing other than goodness referred to the driving away of wretchedness. Therefore, when I reflect that it is a characteristic of goodness to drive away wretchedness and yet it is itself goodness, with confidence I have recourse to mercy.

And it is called great, with its own incomprehensibility, by which it fills all things. Psalm 32. *The earth is full of the mercy of the Lord.*

And it has a place in all things. For the righteous have preserved their innocence because of the mercy of God. Augustine: "O Lord, I impute to your grace the evils that I have not done."

Also, sinners have been turned to righteousness because of the mercy of God. 1. Timothy 1 "I obtained the mercy of God."

Also, those living in sin have experienced the mercy of God. Lamentations 3. "The many mercies of the Lord that we are not consumed."

Also it is said with great sublimity because *his tender mercies are upon all his works.*

For mercy does not designate in God passion of the intellect, but goodness for driving away wretchedness. And it is great in duration. Isaiah 34. "With everlasting kindness have I had mercy on thee."

Likewise, great in power for it made God man, it brought God down from heaven to earth and made the immortal to die. Ephesians 2. "But God who is rich in mercy."

Likewise, great through accomplishment because through mercy man can be lifted up from every misfortune. Psalm 85. *Thy mercy is great towards me* and *Thou hast forgiven the wickedness of my sin* (Psalm 31). And therefore with confidence I ask: *Have mercy on me, O God.*

Also, another reason is that from the beginning of the world I have found in all things the effects of your mercy; and therefore he says: *And according to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my iniquity;* as though he were saying: Have mercy on me accordingly, as variously and in manifold ways you ahve been merciful to all men. Whence it is said in Isaiah 63: "I will remember the tender mercies of the Lord." Psalm 24: "Remember thy bowels of compassion that are from the beginning of the world."

*Blot out my iniquity.* Here he sets forth the effect of having mercy. Nathan said (II Kings 12) "The Lord has taken away thy sin: thou shalt not die." And thus he was secure from punishment; but he wanted his sin to be eradicated totally. There remains however a double effect of sin: that is to say the charge of punishment and a stain on the soul.

First therefore he asks that the charge of punishment be removed; and therefore he says: *Wash me yet more from my iniquity.* It should be known that in Jeremias 17 it is said that "The sin of Juda is written with a pen of iron, with the point of a diamond:" in the likeness of a judge who writes a punishment which so long as it is preserved written, thus lon godes it have the spirit of punishing. But if he puts aside this spirit, he does not preserve the scripture. And thus, written with a pen hard as steel is said when sin is not blotted out. And this is why he says: *Blot out my iniquity*; that is, you will not impute to me iniquity for punishment. Isaiah 43: "I am, I am he that blot out your iniquities." Also, in the same 44: "I have blotted out thy iniquities as clouds and thy sins as a mist."

*Yet more.* Here he asks that the uncleanness of guilt be removed. The man who has a well-disposed conscience abhors more the uncleanness of the guilt than the severity of the punishment, and therefore says: *Wash me yet more,* as if he were saying: I ask that you blot out the punishment, but I ask yet more that you cleanse the stain.

Or, *Wash yet more* which I understand Romans 8: "For we know not what we should pray for as we ought." Ephesians 3: "Who is able to do all things more abundantly than we ask for or understand."

Two things are necessary for removing a stain, namely, a preceding washing and a following cleanliness. In bodies a washing is made through water, and so, according to the Gloss, the Psalm, through water, prefigures the power of baptism, by whcih God would be removing sin. Ezech. 36: "I will pour upon you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all you filthiness. Zach. 13: "There shall be a fountain open to the house of David for the washing of sinners and of the unclean woman." And although baptism had not yet been instituted, nevertheless the power of God was washing in baptism. Therefore, *Wash me from my iniquity.* Jeremias 4: "Wash thy heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem, that thou mayest be saved."

Also I ask that you cleanse me of sin for none is cleansed except by you. Job 14. "Who can make him clean that is conceived of unclean seed?" Eccli. 34. "Who will be made clean by the unclean?" And he says two things, namely, iniquity is opposed to justice, but sin to cleanliness and adultery is this. And thus it was iniquity insofar as he harmed another through murder; but it is sin through the adultery in which he made himself unclean.

*For.* Here he acknowledges guilt: and first he acknowledges the guilt, secondly he shows that this confession has been accepted by God. First, therefore, he acknowledges guilt, secondly he amplifies the same guilt, where he says, *To Thee only have I sinned*; thirdly he shows its origin, where he says, *For behold.*

Therefore he recognizes his guilt saying, *For iniquity.* There are certain ones who do not perceive thier sins on account of three causes. For the reckoning is made worse from the weight of the sin. Proverbs 18: "The wicked man when he is come into the depth of sincs, contemneth." Psalm 39: *My iniquities have overtaken me, and I was not able to see.*

Also because they do not remember. Eccli. 5: "He has forgotten his delights."

Also, because of the flatterings of men. Psalm 9: *The sinner is praised in the desires of his soul.*

And therefore, because others praise him for his sins, he does not remember. But happy is he who, like David, remembers his sin. Proverbs 14: "The heart that knoweth the bitterness of his own soul, in his joy the stranger shall not intermeddle."

As to the second he says: *And my sin is always before me.* There are certain ones who, although they perceive their sin, nevertheless do not abominate it; but that sin of theirs always holds against itself as inimical and hurtful and detestable. And he says *Always.* There are some who abominate their sin for a time. James 1: "For he beheld himself, and went his way, and presently ofrgot what manner of man he was." Isaiah 38: "I will recount to thee all my years in the bitterness of my soul." The psalm: *I know my iniquity.*

Another text, *In my presence,* and thus it is described that he knows his guilt, and that he continuously reflects upon it. And this was brought about through Nathan the prophet under a similitude.

*To thee only have I sinned.* Above, the Psalmist put down the recognition of his own guilt: here however he amplifies his guilt and about this he does two things. First he amplifies it; second he sets forth that which follows upon the amplification where he says, *That thou mayest be justified.* He amplifies this guilt by way of respect for God in a two-fold manner as it is said in Jeremiah 29: "I will be the judge and the witness." It seems, however, that he who does not fear to sin because of his judgment despises God as a judge. And similarly he despises God as a witness who sins in his eyes; and therefore he says: *To thee only have I sinned.*

But has he not sinned against Urias whom he killed? But he says, *To thee only,* that is, to God, for he is not guilty to his servant, but to the judgment of God. For when a master, who is over his servant, sins, he does not sin against the servant, but against God. Wisdom 6: "Power is given you by the Lord, and strength by the Most Hight who will examine your works, and search out your thoughts."

Or, *to thee only,* that is, by comparison, against you only have I sinned: and this can be referred either to God or to Christ. To sin against God is said by comparison to the just one; and thus *To thee only have I sinned,* by despising your judgment. Likewise I despised you as a witness, for *I have done evil before thee*: I have done this to you seeing and present. Proverbs 15: "Hell and destruction are before the Lord: how much more the hearts of the children of men?" Eccli. 23. "The eyes of the Lord are far brighter than the sun."

*That thou mayest be justified.* Here is set forth what is attendant upon that amplification; and this can be read in manifold ways: but first I shall say what appears more greatly. Now *That,* at some time is set forth causally, at some time it is set forth consecutively only: and this is its understanding: *I have done evil before thee, that thou mayest be justified,* for none is justified on account of sin, but this follows from sin, that from the very fact that man sins, the justice of God is rendered more manifiest.

For it appeared that God punished him for his sins. But this punishment consists in two things. First, he threatens; secondly, he imposes a penalty; and in both he is just. As to the first he says, *In thy words,* by which you threaten a penalty. Proverbs 8: "My words are just." As for the second he says, *Thou mayest overcome when thou art judged*: that is, when you are considered in judgment with others. Often God wishes to be judged with us to show forth his justice and ours as well. Isaiah 5: "Judge between me and my vineyard." And in this God is found more just. Job 9: "If he will contend with God, he cannot answer him one for a thousand.

And that this should be the purpose of the Psalm is clear from the Apostle: Romans 3: "But God is true; and every man a liar, as it is written."

But in the Gloss it says that that which is said, *That thou mayest be justified in thy words and mayest overcome when thou art judged* may not be joined together with *I have done evil before thee*; but with this, that he says, *To thee only,* that is for comparison with you, who only are just, and inasmuch as all your words are just. And thus, *That* is set forth causally; as if he were saying: Inasmuch as you are just, *that thou mayest be justified.*

Or if it be referred to Christ, the sense is thus: *To thee only,* that is to say, to Christ, *have I sinned,* for you are just, *and mayest overcome* all men *when thou art judged,* even judged by Pilate.

Or, otherwise: *That thou mayuest be justified* in this, yet more do I seek that you wash me *that thou mayest be justified* in this, that is to say, that our promises may be completely true, anmely about the Christ to be born; to whom it was promised (Psalm 131). *Of the fruit of thy womb I will set upon thy throne.* And that sin might be dismissed, II Kings 12: "The Lord hath taken away thy sin." *And that thou mayest overcome when thou art judged* by men, for you are not bound to fulfill the things promised and you are not bound to blot out my sins.

*For behold.* Here he sets forth the root of guilt. The root of all actual guilt is original sin which is contracted from parents tainted with that sin. This tainting was in the father of David himself, and in his mother. As to has father, he says: *I was conceived in iniquities,* not in actual sins, for not of adultery, but of marriage, and he was born to, or sprung from, the hold Jesse, as it is said in the final chapter of Ruth; but in original sin: for in this sin all are born. Romans 5: "By one man sin entered this world."

But since there is one original sin, why does he say: *I was conceived in iniquities?*

It must be said that original sin is one in essence, as it thus may be said, many, however, in power: for it furnishes opportunity for all other sins. Romans 7: "The sin which is in my flesh is effectual." And this lessens guilt, as if he were saying: It is not astonishing if I sin, for I was conceived in them.

As for his mother he says: *And in sins did my mother conceive me.*

But had not the parents of David been cleansed from original sin through circumsicion?

It must be said that baptism and circumcision clease the soul of original guilt, but so far incitement remains; and circumcision was done in the flesh, and man engenders fleshly children according to the flesh: and therefore it was necessary again that a son having been born should be circumcised; as now one born of baptized parents is baptized.

Another text has: *My mother sustains me.* And this refers to actual sins; for likewise in children are found irregular disturbances as Augstine says in Confessions 6.

Another text has: *My mother brought me forth.* And thus certain ones are sanctified in the womb; but all except Christ are conceived in original sin; therefore he says that he was not sanctified in the womb, but born in original sin.

*For behold thou has loved truth.* He who wishes to give satisfaction, should love those things that God loves; but God loves the truth of faith. John 18: "Everyone that is of the truth heareth my voice." Also, justice. Psalm 88: "Mercy and truth shall go before thy face." And this is necessary in him who repents, that he might inflict punishment upon himself because he transgressed.

Also confession is necessary that he confess his sins.

*The uncertain things.* Here he asks for reparation totally: and first he sets forth the hope that he has: secondly, a request. And first he sets forth the kindness received through which he is raised up into hope; second, he sets forth his trust, where he says, *Thou shalt sprinkle me.*

He called to mind the benefit of potency, when he said, *The uncertain and hidden things*: for I, certainly as King, had the benefit of prophecy. II Kings 23: "The spirit of the Lord hath spoken by me, and his word by my tongue." And he sets forth three things: namely, the matter of prophecy, the method, and the cause.

He shows forth the matter of prophecy when he says, *The uncertain and hidden things.* Prophecy is about these things; namely the uncertain and hidden things that are comprehended through your wisdom. In us, something is unknown in a two-fold way, which, nevertheless, is known to God. Something in unknown to us either on account of defect, or on account of excess.

On account of defect, something is unknown to us that reaches to the future: because it does not yet have the truth determined.

On account of excess is unknown to us the divine substance and that which exceeds our capacity. Nevertheless, both had been revealed to David through the spirit of prophecy. Amos 3: "The Lord God doth nothing without revealing his secret to his servants the prophets."

Therefore, *The uncertain things thou hast made manifest to me,* that is, those things which of their nature have changeableness; and they have been revealed to him, as is clear in the Psalm. Those things are called hidden that go beyond the eye of the mind of nature. Job 28: "Wisdom is drawn out of secret places." Eccli. 24: "I dwell in the highest places, and my throne is in a pillar of a cloud."

And these things lie concealed in the wisdom of God; as if he were saying: It is allowed that they be hidden from us, yet they are comprehended by your wisdom; and among the hidden things he recounts the mystery of the incarnation, which, furthermore, *thou hast made manifest to me.*

Also the mercy of God is reckoned among those things because it removes sins. But it is better that it should be received all together. The manner of revelation is set forth when he says, *Thou hast made manifest to me.*

The manner of prophecy is three-fold. One, in which supernatural and understandable truth is revealed, under corporal likenesses and fancies, and thus it is said in Isaiah 6: "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and elevated." Another, in which is made a revelation of supernatural and understandable truth, without a cloud of imaginary fancy indeed it is not yet revealed, and thus was made the revelation to Moses in Numbers 12: "Plainly, and not by riddles and figures doth he see the Lord."

And of such a kind was the revelation to David in II Kings 23: "The God of Israel siad to me." And below: "As the light of the morning when the sun riseth shineth in the morning without clouds."

*Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop.* Above, the Psalmist remembered God's excellent kindness to him with respect to the grace of prophecy, from which he rose in hope; here, however, he shows what he was hoping for from God. And there were two things: first, he hopes for the removal of the evils that he had incurred through sin; second, he hopes for the restitution of the good things that he had lost, where he says, *To my hearing.*

For it must be known that man, through sin, first incurs uncleanness. Jer. 1. "You have been stained in your iniquity." Secondly, he incurs disgrace. Whence, Lamentations 4: "Their face is made blacker than coals." And he hopes that these two things are removed from himself: uncleanness, namely, and spiritual disgrace.

Uncleanness happens out of that, for man's desire inheres in temporal things, to which it is made similar: whence if it be added to baser things, as gold to lead, it is made base. Hosea 9: "They become abominable, as those were, which they loved."

But digrace happens out of this that it inheres in earthly things by which is obscured in it the light of reason, because it is compared to brute beasts. Psalm 48: *And man when he was in honour did not understand; he is compared to senseless beasts, and is become like to them.*

And therefore the soul is made black, or dark: and therefore as to the first he says: *Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssop*: where he alludes to the rite of the Old Testament. Numbers 19 where on the third day an unclean person would be sprinkled with the water of purification, and on the seventh day he would be washed with water and his garments likewise would be washed; it would be done with water of purification.

And therefore he says: *Thous sahlt sprinkle me with hyssop.* And that water is made from the ash of a ruddy calf, through which was figured Christ. Whence through that sprinkling that he desires is signified a sprinkling of the blood of Christ. I Peter 1: "Unto sprinkling of the blood of Christ." Hebrews 12: "You are come to mount (Sion)." And below: "And to the sprinkling of blood which speaketh better than that of Abel."

This was done with hyssop. Hyssop is a plant which cleaves to the earth and cures swelling, as it is said in the Gloss: and it suits a fiath that has humility: for through faith the understanding is subjected to God. II Corinthians 10: "Bringing into captivity every understanding unto the obedience of Christ."

Also it is rooted in rock, that is, in Christ. Matthew 16: "Upon this rock I will build my Church." The rock is Christ; II Corinthians 10: "Also it drives away the pride of human spirit, which is in those who do not hearken to the faith of Christ." I Timothy 6: "If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ...he is none of this." (Romans 8). He therefore says: O Lord, I have a firm hope that you will sprinkle me with the water of purification. Ezechial 36: "I will pour upon you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all your filthiness."

*Thou shalt wash me.* For after faith, baptism is necessary. Zach. 13: "There shall be a fountain open to the house of Jacob for the washing of the sinner, and of the unclean woman." Isaiah 1: "Wash yourselves, be clean." The effect of this washing" *I shall be made whiter than snow*; for blackness will be taken away and this namely because my soul will be whiter than snow. Isaiah 1: "If your sins be as scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow."

And he says, *Than snow,* because the brilliance of the soul made holy surpasses all corporeal beauty, as is evident in Matthew 17, on the Transfiguration of Christ whose "garments became white as snow." It applies all the just to the garments of Christ. Isaiah 49: "Thou shalt be clothed with all these as with an ormament." And through this he points out that he relates to the garment of Christ through baptism. "As maany as have been baptized, have put on Christ" says the Apostle in Galations 3.

*To my hearing.* Here he sets forth how he has hope about the recovery of the good things he had lost: and they are two, namely, the gift of prophecy and joy of conscience. The gift of prophecy is likened to hearing, for the prophet does not see the essence of God, that he might see in it revealed things; but certain signs of revealed truth are had in the soul of a prophet by way of speaking, and so forth. I Kings 3. "Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth." Isaias 21. "That which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, I have declared unto you." This hearing was interrupted for him through sin and he hopes that he will recover it and therefore he says: *To my hearing thou shalt give joy and gladness.*

Or, *To my hearing,* by which I heard from Nathan that my sin had been removed, by which I conceived gladness.

As for joy of conscience, it must be known that spiritual joy has three steps. The first is manifest in the conciliation of desire; the second in the enlarging of the heart; the third in advancing to outward things.

Conciliation is designated by joy, when he says: *To my hearing thou shalt give joy;* from this namely that I may hear what you say, or what Nathan said. Philippians 4. "Rejoice in the Lord always; again, I say rejoice." surely when desires reposes in the thing loved then his soul is enlarged to attain further enlarging; and this appears in perceptible things. II Cor. 6. "Our heart is enlarged."

And therefore he say *gladness,* which here conveys enlargement, as if it were breadth. But when it is beyond this that gladness abounds even to the body. Proverbs 17. "A joyful mind maketh age flourishing; a sorrowful spirit drieth up the bones."

And therefore in a vision of glory in the land after the resurrection, from joy of mind the body will be glorified. Isaias 66. "You shall see and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb." And so he himself says: *The bones that have been humbled shall rejoice;* and this for immediate glorification.

For through the sorrow of repentance the heart of man is crushed; and therefore when men are glad, it is a sign that their bones which are sorrowful and suffering share joy. Proverbs 12. "Grief in the heart of a man shall bring him low." Isaias 58. "He will fill thy soul with brightness, and deliver they bones."

Or, *The bones shall rejoice,* that is spiritual powers, which are increased through spiritual gladness, and because, through this gladness, a just man is made strong.

*Turn away.* Here he seeks for recovery of innocence: and because he regards in himself that there is the evil of guilt and the good of grace, he asks first that the evil, or sin, be removed; second he asks that the effect of sin be removed, *Create a clean heart in me, O God.* For sin is not removed in this way, as if there had not been sin, but as if committed sin might not be imputed to him for punishment, according to Psalm 31. *Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath not imputed sin.* And he speaks according to the parable of the punishing judge who first reckons the amount of guilt, and afterward assesses the penalty; and therefore he asks that he not regard his sin, but that he become forgetful of it; and therefore he says, *Turn away thy face from my sins.*

Secondly he asks that punishment not be inflicted, whence he says, *And blot out all my iniquities;* as if he were saying: I know that I have done evil before you; and therefore I ask that you turn away your face from my sins, that is that you regard not my sins for punishment. Ezech. 18. "I will not remember all his iniquities."

Just so have I deserved the penalty of damnation; but I ask that you blot it out, for even if God does not change plan, nevertheless he changes sentence: *A clean heart.*

Above, the Psalm sought that sin be removed; here, however, it asks that the effects of sin be removed, and they are two; namely pollution of soul and disorder of desire. The first effect happens through this, that man is attached to earthly things: whence he seeks cleanliness of heart. Matthew 5. "Blessed are the clean of heart: for they shall see God."

And therefore he says: *Create a clean heart in me, O God, and a right spirit.* This cleanliness of heart God only is able to reestablish. Job 14. "Who can make him clean that is conceived of unclean seed? is it not thou who only art?" that is to say, clean simply.

And he says, *Create.* Something is created according to the being of nature when it is brought forth to being from nothing. Genesis 1. "In the beginning God created heaven and earth."

Likewise when it is brought forth to the being of grace. I Cor. 13. "If I should have prophecy and should know all mysteries...I am nothing" in the being of grace. But when God operates by the operation of grace in one having grace, he is said to magnify him; but when he makes a just man from a sinner, then he is said properly to create. Eph. 2. "For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus in good works." James 1. "That you might be some beginning of God's creature," that is, a spiritual one.

According to what follows from sin, there is a disorder of the mind that happens through turning away from its due end. So, therefore, through turning to some changeable good the spirit is made unclean. Thus it is disordered through turning from its end; and of such kind is righteousness opposed to disorder whereby man is directed to God. Canticle 1. "The righteous love thee." And therefore he says: *And renew a right spirit;* that is, that you grant it anew for I have lost it through sin. Ephesians 4. "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind." *And renew* not outwardly but *within my bowels* so that, namely, not only may the lips be made right for speaking, but the heart be made right for perceiving.

*Cast me not away from thy face; and take not thy holy spirit from me.* Here he asks for the restoration of grace: and first he asks for grace itself, second he asks for the effect of grace, where he says, *Restore.* One is said to have the grace of God on two accounts. Now, one is said to have the grace of God and of man, and similarly, as far as anything is concerned, that is, when he is pleasing to both, namely to God and to man.

And this grace is called making pleasing. Ephes. 1. "In which he hath graced us in his beloved son." And according to this, grace is declared the benevolence of God, by which God loves man unto eternal life. And as far as anything is concerned, it is dissimilar. For the grace of man does not make him good, but out of its goodness one is made pleasing to man; but with God, it is in a contrary manner: for from the benevolence of God it follows that man should be made good. Therefore there are two things in the grace of God; namely, benevolence itself and its effects on the soul; and he asks for both when he says: *Cast me not away from thy face; and take not thy holy spirit from me.*

And this can be understood in a double sense. He who is in the face of someone is seen by him, and can see him. That one is said to be in the face of God according to III Kings 17. "As the Lord liveth, in whose sight I stand." Genesis 32. "God, in whose sight our fathers walked." And this because they are upright to see God. Psalm 26. *One thing I have asked of the Lord, this will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life.*

Through each sin one is lost; for sinners forsake God, are forsaken by God, and disperse the trust of confidence in God. Isaias 59. "Your sins and iniquities have divided between you and your God (so far as concerns the first) and your sins have hid his face from you;" as far as concerns the second. That one, therefore, is cast away from the face of God through sin; and therefore he asks that he not be finally cast away in both ways.

Likewise note that there are in men two things; namely guilt, from which he is worthy of punishment, and nature from which he has a fitness for grace: and therefore he asks that he look not at his guilt but his nature; and therefore he says, *Cast me not away.*

Likewise, the gift of grace is given through charity, and such a gift is given through the Holy Spirit; and thus he says: *And take not thy holy spirit from me;* whose temple I was, but lost on account of sin. Wisdom 1. "The Holy Spirit of discipline will flee from the deceitful." Take not away, therefore, that is, finally.

*Restore unto me.* For grace does two things in a man. One in respect of higher things: that, namely, it gives cheerfulness, for he who has grace has charity; and he who has charity loves God, and possesses him; and he who has what he loves, rejoices. Therefore, where charity is, there is joy. Romans 14. "The kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but joy in the Holy Ghost." The Psalmist had lost this joy; and therefore he asks that it be restored to him, when he says: *Restore unto me the joy,* not of worldly things, but o *f thy salvation,* that is, of your act of saving.

Another text has *The joy of Jesus,* that is, the Saviour, through whom is effected the forgiveness of sins. Habacuc 3. "I will joy in God my Jesus."

The other effect is in respect of lower things; and this effect is confirmation in grace, which is done through the Holy Spirit: *And strengthen me with a perfect spirit.*

But the Holy Spirit makes strong in a two fold way. In one way, against evil things. Isaias 8. "I have taught thee with a strong arm:" in another way in the good. Isaias 40. "They that hope in the Lord shall renew their strength." This strength is had through the Spirit. For the body is not strong except on account of the strength of spirits; so man is not strong without the Holy Spirit. But it would not have shown strength except it were a perfect spirit, for a lower power is not enough to show help against a higher. For the power of the devil is great. Job 41. "There is no power upon earth that can be compared with him." Therefore against the devil man needs to be helped by a perfect spirit, that is, one ruling and prevailing over all things. And man is needful of this spirit against the spirit of the flesh. Num. 16. "O most mighty, the God of the spirits of all flesh."

Also against the spirit of the world. I Cor. 2. "Now we have received not the spirit of this world, but the spirit that is of God." Also, against the spirit of the devil. I Kings 18. "The evil spirit from the Lord came upon Saul." It must be noted that in this reading there is made a triple mention of spirit: it is called a right spirit, a holy spirit and a perfect spirit. And according to the Gloss, certain persons receive what is called essentially spirit, according to which all that is not body is spirit. Whence spirit is called Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit; but it is better that it be received personally. For the Holy Spirit causes three things in man.

First, rectitude of purpose. Psalm 142. *Thy good spirit shall lead me into the right land.* Also, it sanctifies us. Romans 1. ''According to the spirit of sanctification." Also, it makes us illustrious and makes us princes. Galatians 4. "Because you are sons of God, God hath sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts."

*I will teach.* Above, the Psalmist set forth his petitions to God; here, however, he promises again a making-up: and first he promises what it happens he is about to do for God in the present; secondly, in the future, where he says, *Favourably.* About the first he does two things. First he promises to God certain spiritual sacrifices; second, he excuses himself from the offering of meats, where he says, *For if thou hadst desired.* He promises to God a twofold spiritual sacrifice; namely, of instruction, through which his neighbour is taught; secondly he promises the spiritual sacrifice of praise, through which God is praised, where he says, *Deliver me.*

He therefore says, *I will teach the unjust thy ways.* And it is to be noted what he said above in another Psalm (49) *To the sinner God hath said: Why dost thou declare my justices, and take my name in thy mouth?* Through which he shows that it is not proper for a sinner to pour forth instruction.

And as long as he felt himself a sinner, he did not promise to make instruction known; but after God restored to him a perfect spirit: it is fitting both that such have instruction and also instruct others. Jeremias 3. "I will give you a pastor according to my own heart, and he shall feed you with knowledge and doctrine."

And it is said of Christ in Acts 1. "Jesus began to do and (afterward) to teach." But the fruit of this instruction is not only observation of the truth towards blessed contemplation, but its extended end is the conversion of sinners: and therefore he says: *And the wicked shall be converted to thee.* Jeremias 15. "They shall be turned to thee, and thou shalt not be turned to them." Psalm 21. *All the Gentiles shall be converted to the Lord.* And according to the Gloss, he calls the same wicked and unjust, howevermuch David understands that they are called unjust who sin against God; and therefore he significantly says, *I will teach the unjust,* as if he were saying: Although some revere God, yet they do produce things against their neighbour; and to these I will teach your ways, that is, so they offend not their neighbour. I John 4. "And this commandment we have from God, that he who loveth God, love also his brother."

*Deliver me from blood.* Here he promises a sacrifice of praise; and there are two obstacles to this sacrifice. One is the guilt of sin; the other is an inner failing. First, therefore, he asks for the removal of the first obstacle; secondly, he seeks the removal of the second, where he says, *O Lord, thou wilt open my lips.* He seeks therefore the removal of the obstacle, and promises a sacrifice of praise. The obstacle to divine praise, as was said, is the guilt of sin. Eccles. 15. "Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner."

Now David was guilty of serious sin; and therefore he asks to be liberated from it and therefore says: *Deliver me from blood.* According to the Gloss, the noun blood is not declined in the plural number; nevertheless the translator wished to use it for an expression of sin; and this refers to concupiscence of the flesh, which is flesh and blood. Matth. 16. "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in heaven." As if he were saying: Deliver me from sins that have been committed from flesh and blood.

Or it must be said that David had committed the fault of adultery and of murder; and in both there is blood: for in murder blood is poured out. Psalm 5. *The bloody and the deceitful man the Lord will abhor.* But adultery proceeds from a fervour of blood; and he therefore says. *From blood.* Osee 4. "Blood hath touched blood." O God, deliver me, therefore, from blood, for you only can do it. Isaias 43. "I am he that blot out thy iniquities for my own sake, and I will not remember thy sins." And because you are *God of my salvation,* that is, the one who can save me. *And my tongue shall extol;* that is, with delight, and with inward joy of heart, I shall speak of your justice. Isaias 30. "You shall have a song like the voice of the sanctified solemnity." Likewise in the same (Ch. 35) "They shall come into Sion with praise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads." Psalm 41. "With the voice of joy and praise; the noise of one feasting."

*O Lord, thou wilt open my lips.* But it must be understood that man at times is prevented from instruction also on account of the hindrance of speaking inwardly; and this happens at times on account of the fault of the hearers. Ezech. 3. "I will make thy tongue stick fast to the roof of thy mouth, and thou shalt be dumb." And below: "Because they are a provoking house." And on account of his particular sin. Psalm 106. *All iniquity shall stop her mouth.* Because then God only "made the tongues of infants eloquent:" Wisdom 10. Therefore he asks: O Lord, take away the hindrances, which I have incurred through sin, from my lips; and thou *Wilt open my lips.* Ephesians 6. "That speech may be given me, that I may open my mouth with confidence to make known the mystery of the gospel."

But it must be noted that in the opening of the mouth is understood the depth of instruction, wherever in the Scriptures is found the opening of the mouth; as in Job 3. "After this Job opened his mouth." And Mattthew 5. "Opening his mouth, Jesus." that is, in the depth of Scripture. And then *my mouth shall declare thy praise;* as if he were saying: What I hold in my heart, I shall confess with my mouth.

*For if thou hadst desired sacrifice.* Here he absolves himself: and first he shows that sacrifice had not been accepted by God; second, he shows that sacrifice might be accepted by God, where he says, *A sacrifice to God.*

Therefore he says: I promise again instruction and praise: for this sacrifice will glorify you; but a carnal sacrifice is not accepted by you. And therefore he says: *If thou hadst desired sacrifice,* that is to say, carnal; *I would indeed have given;* but indeed, *with burnt offerings thou wilt not be delighted.*

But does he not desire carnal sacrifices? If God does not approve those sacrifices, why then in the Old Law did he command that they be done?

It must be said that he commanded that they be done not for his sake, but because they were figures of the inner true sacrifice whereby Christ offered himself; and they are signs of an inner sacrifice, inasmuch as man offers his life to God, and again they had been ordained for the sake of uncultured people who did not know God and therefore it was fitting that they honour him and learn about God, lest they render sacrifices to idols, to which they were greatly inclined. But because David knew from the Holy Spirit that sacrifice of the heart was accepted by God, he did not give bodily sacrifices.

But among all the sacrifices, holocausts were more accepted by God. And yet those were not accepted by God for their own sake; therefore he says: *With burnt offerings thou wilt not be delighted:* for if they would have been accepted by you purely, I would have offered them. And if it should be proposed that they were an aroma most pleasant to the Lord, it must be said that this was for the sake of a symbolical sacrifice and as a sign of inward sacrifice which is pleasing to God. Whence he appends: *A sacrifice to God,* that is, accepted, *an afflicted spirit.* Augustine, in Book X of On the City of God: "Every sacrifice that he offers outwardly is a sign of inward sacrifice in which he offers his soul to God."

But it should be known that the soul of man is led into sin first through empty mirth. Ecclesiastes 2: "Laughter I counted error: and to mirth I said: Why art thou vainly deceived?" that is, led into sin. Secondly, out of sin it is hardened to spiritual things. Eccli. 3. "A hard heart shall fear evil at the last." Rom. 2. "According to thy hardness and impenitent heart." Thirdly, because it suffices unto itself in bodily things, and does not attend to spiritual, then it is proud, for "it is the beginning of all sin:" Eccli. 10. Therefore, it is fitting that a penitent, who offers his heart as a sacrifice to God, do the opposites of all these things.

And first, against empty mirth it is fitting that it assume the sorrow of penitence; and therefore he supplies: *A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit;* that is, that it be sorrowful for all sins together, not for one only. II Cor. 7. "The sorrow that is according to God worketh penance, steadfast unto salvation." Baruch 2. "The soul that is sorrowful for greatness of evil she hath done, and goeth bowed down and feeble, giveth glory and sorrowfulness to thee, the Lord."

Against the second is opposed contrition: whence he says, *A contrite heart.* And mark the difference between shattered and ground: for shattered are those things that are divided into large parts; ground are those that are divided into the smallest parts. Therefore as long as one has a hard heart, then he has his heart as if entirely in evil; but when he wholly forsakes sin, yielding himself to spiritual things, then he is called contrite. Job 16. "I that was formerly so wealthy (that is, in temporal goods), am all on a sudden broken to pieces."

To the third is opposed humility; and he therefore says: *A humbled (heart), O God, thou wilt not despise:* for "God resisteth the proud; and giveth grace to the humble:" James 4. And it must be understood that he makes mention of the heart and the spirit: and the spirit relates to impetuosity, and thus it relates to the irascible. Isaias 25. "The blast of the mighty is like a whirlwind beating against a wall." The heart relates to the concupiscible; and so it is given through this to be understood that whatever is in the power of desire should be offered to God in sacrifice.

*Favourably.* Here he promises what he ought to do in the future: and first he seeks what must be done by God; secondly, he declares, in the place where he says, *Then shalt thou accept.*

The eye of David was carried to two things. One, near, which was allusional, the other, remote, which was figurative. The first, for it is read that David built the walls of the city of Jerusalem, but he had not completed them; and after they had been completed, the temple was to be built, and he therefore says: *Deal in thy good will that the walls of Jerusalem may be built up.* And then when the walls have been built, the temple will be built; and *then shalt thou accept the sacrifice of justice, oblations and whole burnt offerings.* And all this was allusional.

But if we refer to the figurative, so it must be said, there is a two-fold Jerusalem; that is heavenly. Galatians 4. "That Jerusalem, which is above, is free: which is our mother. The other is the present Church, imaged from her. Apoc. 21. "I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God."

And both have walls. The walls of the heavenly Jerusalem are bulwarks of eternity and of immortality, which the saints pursued through Christ. Romans 8. "He that raised up Jesus Christ, shall quicken also our mortal bodies." The walls of the present Jerusalem, to wit, Ezechiel 13. "You have not stood up to face the enemy, nor have you set up a wall for the house of Israel, to stand in battle." He foresaw their building in the spirit of the prophecy of Isaias 56. For this, therefore, that those walls might be built, *deal favourably, O Lord,* that is, show forth this goodness, which goodness the Apostle says is accomplished in Titus 3. "The goodness and kindness of God our Saviour appeared."

And this is not on account of our merits, but on account of your good will. Romans 12. "That you may prove what is the good, and the acceptable, and the perfect will of God." I Thes. 4. "This is the will of God, your sanctification." And this you should do for that end *that the walls of Jerusalem may be built up,* either militant or triumphant.

But what will it be? Then shalt thou accept the sacrifice of justice. And this is explained in a three-fold way: and the first two ways relate to the present Church. For in one way we are to refer to this sacrifice, not in which cattle are slaughtered, but in which men are slain for the sake of Christ, and in this there is a two-fold step: for the sacrifice of Christ holds the first place. Gal. 2. "He loved me and delivered himself for me." And therefore he says, *Then,* that is in the building of the walls of Jerusalem, that is, of the Church, *shalt thou accept the sacrifice of justice,* whereby Christ, who is just, offered himself. John 8. "Which of you shall convince me of sin?"

And it is because he is of such great virtue that he gave satisfaction for man in order to justify him. The other holy ones who, for the sake of God, offered themselves in sacrifice, hold the second place: whence he says, *Oblations,* that is, confessors, who by confessing Christ, as much as in them, offered themselves to death, it is not permitted that they should have been slain. Judges 5. "O you of Israel, that have willingly offered your lives to danger, bless the Lord."

*And whole burnt offerings.* These are the martyrs. John 15. "Greater love no man hath, that a man lay down his life for his friends." *And then shalt thou accept,* when thus these same holy ones lay themselves like calves upon your altar; that is, upon your faith, and upon Christ; that is, they set themselves like calves for the sake of Christ, and faith in Christ, for immolation.

In another way, as may be related so far as concerns the works of the just: and the sense is this: You will accept justice as a sacrifice, for the works of justice and of mercy are like a sacrifice. Hebrews 13. "Do not forget to do good, and to impart; for by such sacrifices God's favour is obtained." And then you will accept oblations. According to Gregory, a holocaust is that which was wholly burned; and it signifies perfect men who give themselves totally to God.

Oblations are those who offer something and reserve something: and then the priests *shall lay calves,* that is, the newly converted, *upon the altar,* that is, upon the faith of Christ: or then the greater prelates will lay preachers groaning with instruction in faith *upon the altar,* that is, upon the confession of faith.

There is a third explanation about the heavenly Jerusalem; and the sense is: *Then,* namely when the walls of the heavenly Jerusalem shall be built up, *shalt thou accept the sacrifice of justice.* Here, whenever a sacrifice of penitence is made; but there there is so much of praise. Isaias 60. "Thy people shall be all just, they shall inherit the land for ever." And this is that sacrifice of praise about which Psalm 63 speaks. *Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, forever shall they praise thee.* And then oblations, that is the lesser saints, *and whole burnt offerings,* that is, the greater saints you will accept. And this the Angels will offer, to whom it is said, Matth. 13. "But the wheat gather up into my barn." And these Angels *shall lay* the saints *upon thy altar,* that is, into heavenly glory. Apoc. 8. "And there was given to him much incense, that he should offer of the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar." Psalm 68. *It shall Please God better than a young calf, that bringeth forth horns and hoofs.*
