# Section 1 — Psalm 51

**(Unto the end, understanding for David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul David went to the house of Achimelech) Why dost thou glory in malice, thou that art mighty in iniquity? All the day long thy tongue hath devised injustice: as a sharp razor, thou hast wrought deceit.**

**Thou hast loved malice more than goodness: and iniquity rather than to speak righteousness. Thou hast loved all the words of ruin, O deceitful tongue.**

**Therefore will God destroy thee for ever: he will pluck thee out, and remove thee from thy dwelling place: and thy root out of the land of the living.**

**The just shall see and fear, and shall laugh at him, and say: Behold the man that made not God his helper: But trusted in the abundance of his riches: and prevailed in his vanity.**

**But I, as a fruitful olive tree in the house of God, have hoped in the mercy of God for ever, yea for ever and ever. I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it: and I will wait on thy name, for it is good in the sight of thy saints.**

Here the second group of fifty begins. And, just as was said in the first book, the first group of fifty pertain to those repenting; the second group of fifty pertain to those who are making progress. Regarding these people, there are three things that ought to be regarded in an order. For, the first step of those who are making progress is justification. The second step is the practice of good works. The third is the consideration of divine works.

And so, this group of fifty is divided into three parts. The first takes up considerations of those things that pertain to justification; the second concerns those things that pertain to the doing of good works, so, [ *Give to the king* ] *thy judgment, O God* [Psalm 71]; the third concerns those things that pertain to the consideration of divine works, so, *God hath stood* [Psalm 81]. In justification, two things are necessary: namely, a turning away from sin, and a conversion to God. And so, two things are in sin, as a contrary; namely, a turning away from God, and a turning towards sin.

Therefore he first sets down the psalms which pertain to the turning away from and detestation of sin; second, he sets down the psalms which make, or contain, a subjection of oneself to God, at, *Psalm 61: Shall not my soul be subject to God?* With respect to the first, he does two things. First, he indicates the wickedness of sinners; second, he indicates the evil things that are done by sinners. A sin is made more serious by two things; namely, by the affection that one has for the sinning, and by the contempt for God.

First, then, it makes the wickedness of the sinners more serious by the former; second, it makes the wickedness more serious from the latter, at *Psalm. 52:* *The fool said in his heart*. The title, *Unto the end, understanding for David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul David went to the house of Achimelech,* has this history, that in *1 Kings 21* and *22*, namely when David fled from Saul, he went to Nobe where the priests were, and he accepted the sword of Goliath and the loaves of proposition, and Doeg the Edomite was there among them, who was the most important of Saul's herdsmen; and when Saul complained that nobody would fight for him against David, that man Doeg related to him how Abimelech the priest had taken David in, and had given him Goliath's sword, and the loaves of proposition: and Saul, angered by this, ordered that all the priests be killed.

However, since those people there were loth to put their hands to the killing of the priests, that man Doeg slew all of the priests. But there is some discrepancy between the title and the narrative, because the chief of the priests in the narrative is called Achimelech, but in the title is Abimelech. And a gloss says that this was done by an error of the scribes, or because of the mystery: for, by David, Christ is signified: for not only because David made use of the official business of the kingdom and his rank, but also because he made use of the priestly office, by the eating of the loaves of proposition.

Doeg can be interpreted as movement: the Edomite as terrestrial; Saul as petition; Abimlech as the kingdom of my father. By Doeg therefore who was a movement by the terrestrial, when David, that is, Christ, came to Abimelech, that is, to the Jews who are my fathers kingdom, he, Doeg announced this to Saul, that is, to Death, [who then decreed] that the impious by hands and words summon him to trial and slay him.

Or, Doeg is the Antichrist who will stir the earthly people up in the end of the world. When Christ came to his Church, he announced that there is a devil who persecutes the Church. And principally this entire psalm is understood to be about the evil people who persecuted Christ, whether it was against Christ himself, or against the members of His body.

So, this psalm is divided into two parts. In the first part, he relates the wickedness of the sinner, who clings to iniquity. In the second, he relates the justice of the holy people, thus, *But I, as a fruitful olive tree*. Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he speaks of the fault of the evil people. Second, of their punishment, so, *Therefore will God destroy thee for ever.*

But, it should be known, that in the man who clings to sin, three things follow in an order. The first is the delight of the sin. The second is the thought of the sin: for we think within those things that we take delight in. The third is the glorying on his part of having perpetrated the sin. For, one takes joy quite naturally when one does what one loves. It proceeds, therefore, in this way from the final end to the first, from the glory of the evil people in the act of sin. Second from the thought about the sin, whence, *All the day long*. Third, from the love of the sin, whence, *Thou hast loved*.

Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he establishes the power of some people to act evilly. Second, he indicates that certain people glory in an evil deed. For, certain people are prone to and strong in evil deeds and weak in good deeds. He says therefore, "Thou sinner", *Thou that art mighty in iniquity* - *Jeremias 3:* *Behold, thou hast spoken, and hast done evil things, and hast been able;* *Isaias 5:* *Woe to you that are mighty to drink wine*. So, you, who are so mighty, what is it that you seek that you should glory in wickedness? So you should be ashamed and be confounded and be saddened - *Proverbs 2: Who are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in most wicked things*: *All the day long thy tongue hath devised injustice*.

He points this out following from what he set down above: namely, that not only do they glory in their wicked ways, but they think to themselves how they might do evil. And first he sets down their constant repetition of that thinking without interruption; so he says, *All the day long thy tongue hath devised injustice*. It is improperly said that the tongue devises or thinks, for to think pertains to the heart; and accordingly this can be understood in two ways: *Thy tongue*, that is, your heart, which is manifested in your tongue - *Ecclesiasticus 21: The heart of fools is in their mouth*: for it is at one with their heart, that is, their heart is always ready for talking. Or, *Thy tongue has devised injustice,* in so far as it has spoken of schemes and plots, *All the day long*. And especially, because it teaches to sin by the tongue.

Second, it carries out those things it has devised; for this reason he says, *As a sharp razor, thou hast wrought deceit*, and this is a similitude with respect to three characteristics. First, because a sharp razor, that is a sharp blade, effectively and quickly cuts, for no hair resists it: so Doeg did not hold himself back in respect from the priesthood nor from fear of David nor anyone; rather he killed all of the priests - *Micheas 2:* *In the morning light they execute it*, that is to say, immediately. Or, *As a sharp razor*, etc. because, just as a razor razes hairs, so the wicked bring deceit against the just, that is, they incite persecutors against them; but this, in fact, they do just like a razor, which razes the superficial hairs: for the sinners can only steal the superfluous, namely the temporal, things away from the holy people, never, in fact, spiritual things. But, *As a sharp razor* etc. because they cause one to expect a purging, but, just as unproficient barbers slice into the flesh, so the wicked act in such a way that they aim and strive to cut into the flesh of the just by their machinations, that is, into their good reputation by an iniquitous tongue - *Psalm 27: Who speak peace with their neighbour*, etc.

Jerome has, *Why do you glory in wickedness? The mercy of God is powerful the entire day long.* And here the meaning is: as if to say, "you who are powerful in evil, why do you glory in wickedness? For mercy is prepared, to which you can be turned."

*Thou hast loved*. Here it is a matter of the emotion of the evil person, or the sinner, for the injuring of his neighbor. And this emotion consists in two sets of things: namely, the external ones and the internal ones.

For first of all he indicates a withdrawal of justice in external matters. He says, therefore, *Thou hast loved malice more than goodness*. Goodness, that is a good fiery glow: and so it makes the mind of a man soften and become supple for the sharing of good things; malice, to the contrary, moves the violent force of a man to injuring. And those evil people and sinners love malice more than kindness, that is, goodness, for they are more ready for an evil thing than a good thing, because of the condition that they are frigid and languid - *Job 20:* *For when evil shall be sweet in his mouth, he will hide it under his tongue*. Referring to the withdrawal of justice, he says, "You have loved to speak about iniquity rather than to speak about equity - *Psalm 10: He that loveth iniquity hateth his own soul.*

With respect to the interior matters, he says, "You have loved all of the words of ruination, by dragging other people to their death, just like Doeg: and likewise to the evil of sin - *1 Cor. 15: Evil communications corrupt good manners.* Or by ruining your own self; and so he says, *O deceitful tongue*. And you who are eloquent and deceitful, or who do this thing by a deceitful tongue - *Jeremias 9: Their tongue is a piercing arrow, it hath spoken deceit.*

*Therefore*. Above the Psalmist treated of the wickedness of sinners; but here, he treats of their punishment: and with respect to this, he does two things. First, he sets down the punishment for those very evil deeds. Second, he shows the usefulness of punishment, at, *The just shall see and fear*.

With respect to the first, he does two things. First he writes of the punishment of the evil. Second, he writes of the way of coming to this punishment, at, *He will pluck thee out*. So, he says, *Therefore*, namely, because *Thou hast loved malice* etc. And *Thou hast loved all the words* of ruining other people, *Therefore will God destroy thee for ever*, that is in perpetuity - *Psalm 27: Thou shalt destroy them, and shalt not build them up.* And, as they merit, *Cast down, O Lord, and divide their tongues,* *Psalm 54.* And the way, since, *He will pluck thee out.*

It is to be noted there that first that that destruction is set down with reference to that way of coming to punishment. Second, with reference to the loss of future things.

With reference to the first two things are to be considered. For, it so happens sometimes that people have some foundations in their prosperity, such as friends, and wealth and other things of his nature: and so they are compared to a root, because by this they are rooted in these things; and so he says, *He will pluck thee out*, from all of those things in which and by which you are rooted in prosperity - *Job. 19: He hath taken away my hope, as from a tree that is plucked up;* *Jeremias 1: Lo, I have set thee this day over the nations, and over the kingdoms, to root up, and pull down, and to waste, and to destroy*.

Second, he removes by the first loss, that is, it is totally transferred; whence, [He will] *Remove thee*, that is, he will force you to go away, *From thy dwelling place*, that is from your home and condition and dignity - *Isaias 22: And I will drive thee out from thy station*; *Job 20:* *The eyes that had seen him, shall see him no more.*

Another version has, *From his dwelling place*, that is the Church - *Apocalypse 21:* *Behold the tabernacle of God with men*. Now the good people are mixed in with the evil; but in the end the evil people will be excluded from the Church, where they are now by number but not by merit.

In reference to the loss of future things, he says, *And thy root out of the land of the living*, namely, *He will pluck thee out*. By root is understood here charity, which is the root of all good things - *Ephesians 3:* *Being rooted and founded in charity*. This God takes away *Out of the land of the living*, because he takes away the gift of charity that he gave to you.

Likewise, he takes desire for things away from the good people, which can be signified by *Root* - *I Timothy 6: The root of all evils*, etc. God takes this away by spiritual forces, because those who yearn eagerly after temporal things cannot come to the land of the living: because those who will to be rich fall into temptation (*ibid*): in which desires the evil are rooted, namely the Antichrist, and the Devil - *Job 5: I have seen a fool*, that is, a sinner, *with a strong root, and I cursed his beauty immediately*.

*The just shall see.* Here it is the fruit of the punishment that is set down: for God punishes here, and assigns punishments according to their usefulness for the just. First, according to the fear of punishment, so, *and fear.*

And this can be metaphorically of the condition of the present life, in which the just fear by having reverence for God, and fall away from the condition in which they are in: *Romans 11: Be not highminded, but fear*. But those who are in the kingdom of their father do not fear to fall from any condition, for they are confirmed in the perfection of grace, for they are not separated, but fear with filial reverence - *Psalm 18: The fear of the Lord is holy*, etc. And God's justice will be revered. But, in the present life, more particularly they fear.

Second, according to their contempt for sin and present prosperity. And first, the derision is set down. Second, the cause of the derision is set down, at, *Behold*. In reference to the first, *At him*, that is against him, namely the sinner, *Shall laugh*, that is, they contemn his confidence and prosperity.

And this will especially happen in he future - *Psalm 57: The just shall rejoice when he shall see the revenge; Job 22:* *The just shall see, and shall rejoice*; and they laugh first at the pride of the sinners; second at their vain confidence and their fragile glory: pride, because they do not hope in God, but are confident about themselves, and they say, the just, *Behold the man who made not God his helper*, that is, who did not establish what he needed by the help of God - *Psalm 11: Our lips are our own; Deuteronomy 32:* *He forsook God who made him.* Of vain confidence; so he says, *But trusted in the abundance of his riches* - *Proverbs. 11: He that trusteth in his riches shall fall; 1 Timothy 6: Charge the rich of this world not to be highminded* etc.

Doing evil from vain glory prevails when God permits; so he says, *And prevailed in his vanity*. And it is because of this that he is laughed at - *Psalm 93: The Lord knoweth the thoughts of men, that they are vain.* Or, *Prevailed* etc. so that this refers to the avaricious man, who at least with respect to something prevails over all of the other sinners - *Ecclesiaticus 10:* *But nothing is more wicked than the covetous man*. And from that to which he is led, he easily falls into other things. Or this can be referred to the Antichrist, who prevails over everyone else.

*But I, as a fruitful olive tree*. Here, he speaks of the holiness of the good people. And first he indicates what they do in the present. Second, what they promise, at, *I will praise thee.*

The holy do a good thing in a double way in the present Church. First in that through which they comport themselves well toward their neighbor, by a becoming fertile in those people: and, so, the just man is compared to an olive tree; as if to say: "So, the sinner is pulled out by the roots without fruit": but *I*, *as a fruitful olive tree in the house of God*. And he is compared with an olive tree because of its rich fat: for the olive always has rich fat fruit - *Judges 9:* *Can I leave my fatness* etc.? *Jeremias 11: The Lord called thy name, a plentiful olive tree, fair, fruitful, and beautiful*.

First, then, it makes the wickedness of the sinners more serious by the former; second, it makes the wickedness more serious from the latter, at *Psalm. 52:* *The fool said in his heart*. The title, *Unto the end, understanding for David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul David went to the house of Achimelech,* has this history, that in *1 Kings 21* and *22*, namely when David fled from Saul, he went to Nobe where the priests were, and he accepted the sword of Goliath and the loaves of proposition, and Doeg the Edomite was there among them, who was the most important of Saul's herdsmen; and when Saul complained that nobody would fight for him against David, that man Doeg related to him how Abimelech the priest had taken David in, and had given him Goliath's sword, and the loaves of proposition: and Saul, angered by this, ordered that all the priests be killed.

Here, however, he is compared to the olive especially on account of its fruit: for, from the olive, oil is made, by which mercy is signified, from which the just provide for and to others, and they make the fruit in the Church - *John 15: But I have chosen you; and have appointed you, that you should go, and should bring forth fruit*. And this fruit is to be made in the house of God, not in the world - *Psalm 83: I have chosen to be an abject in the house of my God.*

Again, until then, the just make God another good thing in this world, namely by hoping in him; whence he says, "I have hoped in the mercy of God, not an account of my merits, but on account of his mercy - *Titus 3: Not by the works of justice, which we have done* etc. And this mercy is in eternity.

The other refers to the things to come, *I will wait on thy name, for it is good*. He expects the name of Jesus to be his salvation *.* And this especially applies to those who are already in heaven; whence he says, *For it is good in the sight of thy saints*, who see the essence of goodness, whence they cannot but love God.
