# Section 1 — Psalm 52

**Unto the end, for Maeleth, understandings to David. The fool said in his heart: There is no God.**

**They are corrupted, and become abominable in iniquities: there is none that doth good.**

**God looked down from heaven on the children of men: to see if there were any that did understand, or did seek God.**

**All have gone aside, they are become unprofitable together, there is none that doth good, no not one.**

**Shall not all the workers of iniquity know, who eat up my people as they eat bread?

They have not called upon God: there have they trembled for fear, where there was no fear.**

**For God hath scattered the bones of them that please men: they have been confounded, because God hath despised them.**

**Who will give out of Sion the salvation of Israel? when God shall bring back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.**

*The fool said*. In the previous Psalm, the Psalmist exposed the wickedness of sinners coming from the affection toward the sin; here he sheds light on their wickedness coming from the contempt for God.

The title, *Unto the end, for Maeleth, understandings to David*. This story is found in *1 Kings 17* when David came in flight to Achis the king of the Philistines, who gave him the charge over the city, when it so happened that, he being away, the Amalecites burned the city, David at last pursued them and recovered their booty.

In a mystical sense, by David, Christ is signified, and just as it is said in the gloss, the people of the Amalecites lick blood, and they signify the Antichrist and his people who bathe in carnal desire - *Matthew 16:* *Because flesh and blood hath not revealed it to thee*. Therefore their evil is explained, and for this reason, they are led out of it to Christ.

Augustine says *for Maileth*, which is interpreted as suffering pain and in childbirth; and he signifies the Church, about which, *John 16: A woman, when she is in labour, hath sorrow* etc. And so this Psalm is for the tribulations that the Church suffers for the evils of the world.

And this is therefore by Core, who was one of the chief singers; and this Psalm, sung, is his ministry. Likewise, it should be known that this Psalm is written above, at *13*; it is not, however, the same circle, nor all the same verses. And there it is introduced on account of the first coming of Christ; here it is introduced on account of the coming of Christ to Judgement.

And with respect to the first, he does two things. First he sets down the evil of sinners. Second, he introduces the divine Judgements, whence, *God looked down from heaven*. He does two things with respect to the first. First he sets down the root of the evil, namely contempt. Second, he shows what follows from such a root, whence, *They are corrupted*.

It should be known that wisdom, grasped properly, differs from knowledge, for wisdom has to do with divine cognition, and knowledge with human cognition. The foolish man condemns divine cognition - *Job 22: Who said to God: Depart from us: [we do not want to know your ways];* *Rom. 1: Their foolish heart was darkened*, etc. Therefore, *The fool said*, that is he condemns God and the knowledge of God; and he does this in his heart, he said, *There is no God*.

Against this, Anselm says, *Nobody is capable of thinking God not to be*. We should say that there are two ways in which something can be unknown to us. In one way, on its own account, in the other way, with respect to us. In the first way, things are unknown to us that are foremost with respect to being, like contingency, prime matter, motion, and time. In the second way, those things are unknown to us that excel our cognition.

I say therefore that if we consider God in Himself, he cannot be thought not to be, and no proposition is better known than that one whose predicate is included in the subject. God's being is his essence and thus this proposition: "God is" is known to the highest degree with respect to itself, while however the essence of God is not known to us, but it becomes known to us by its effects.

And so it is that he who denies any effects of God whatsoever, including the Providence of good and evil men and all things universally, and miracles from God, and denies that he would not be omniscient, denies God. And, he says in his heart, since everything that God is, is in the heart from God [by God's agency], and since he chooses none of this, it is reported of the fool, that he says that there is no God.

Or the fool is the Jews - *Psalm. 93:* *Understand, ye senseless among the people*, who said that Christ is not God; *John. 10: That thou, being a man, maketh thyself God.*

*They are corrupted*. Here is the effect of their wickedness. Just as the fear, cognition, and love of God is the principle of every good work, so when the cognition and love of God are taken away, every good life is taken away. And first he points out what follows with respect to the work of evil; second with respect to the loss of the good.

There are two evils that are consequences of this. The first is that they are corrupted. The body is corrupted by the exhalation of natural heat and by the subtraction of actual exterior heat. The natural heat of the human soul is God Himself; and so therefore so long as there is a cognition of God in the soul, it contains its form that God has impressed, namely innocence and the divine image, but when this heat has been taken out, the actual heat, namely the heat of lust and fear, drags it down, the soul is corrupted, and consequently it follows that many throw away the fear and love and cognition of God, and they are corrupted in unclean pursuits - *Osee 9: [They] became abominable, as those things were, which they loved*.

And he says *Iniquities*, that is on account of iniquities, and they even put aside the good. There is not one who does the good - *Jeremias 4:* *They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge*.

*God looked down from heaven*. Here he sets down God's judgement against evil people. And first he brings up the consideration of the judge. Second, he indicates the reason why the judge comes, because *All have gone aside*. Third, the thought, *Shall not all the workers of iniquity know*, is added. The reason why they deny that God exists, is that they believe because of their own high position, God will not perceive the most recent things [they have done] - *Job 22:* *Dost not thou think that God is higher than heaven* etc.

What are you saying? That He would judge as through a dark mist, he would meander around the poles of the sky, he would not consider our deeds? But He looks to that, to the perfection of his wisdom, he clearly sees everything - *Psalm 112: Who is as the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high and looketh down on the low things in heaven and in earth*.

And so therefore he says that the Lord *looked down from Heaven*, that is, he considers the sons of men from His height - *Ecclesiasticus 16:* *For what is my soul in such an immense creation?;* *Proverbs 16: All the ways of a man are open to his eyes*; *Psalm 13: The Lord hath looked down from heaven upon the children of men.*

Or, *From Heaven*, that is, from Christ. Or from the soul of a just man. He examinded the sons of men, *To see if there were any that did understand, or did seek God.* The difference between God and man here is that when men are judges they inquire into the things that concern the external, but God, however, considers the heart - *Psalm 7: The searcher of hearts and reins [kidneys] is God*.

*In his heart*. There are two things that ought to take place with respect to God, namely that the intellect be inwardly fixed on the cognition of God, and that the movement of desire tend towards God as if towards its end. For this reason, he says that He looked down to see if there was any understanding [of Him].

So that if a just man attempts to understand God, God contradicts him in an agreeable way. But, if an evil man attempts to understand God, even though it is said of him that he chooses not to understand so that he might act well, still, he is seeking what he must do so that he comes to God Himself - *Psalm 68: Seek ye God, and your soul shall live*. But God looks down, so that he sees that he arrives at abundant wickedness.

*All have gone aside*. And first, he touches upon the moving away from the root. Second, he says what it is that follows from this. And regarding this, he explains. He says therefore, that He inquired, but He discovered that *All have gone aside, they have become unprofitable together*; and furthermore, *There is none that doth good*. Everyone has fallen away from the understanding and seeking out of God - *Isaias 53: Every one hath turned aside into his own way*. And so it follows that they are unprofitable both for themselves and for others.

Now, those who do not have love of God do not have true faith; whatever works of the genus of good works he performs, they are still unprofitable to him to the reward of eternal life. So, he says, *they have become unprofitable together,* that is, they have performed unprofitable works - *1 Corinthians 13: And if I should distribute all my goods to feed the poor*, etc. *Isaiah* *1: But thou art cast out of thy grave.*

And he elaborates the manner in which they are unprofitable, because *There is none that doth good*, because those things that do not take place in the virtue of faith and are not informed by the love of God, are not good in themselves - *Romans 14: For all that is not of faith is sin.* And he indicates that they have fallen away when he says, *No, not one*, that is, not one is found to be good.

But is there not at all someone good in the whole world? It is to be said that, in one way, if this is referred to the band of evil people, there is no good man. In another way, universally. So, *No, not one*, that is, except for Christ, there is nobody who is by his own virtue good - *Phillipians 2: For it is God who worketh in you*.

*Shall not all the workers of iniquity know?* Above, the Psalmist brought up the topic of the judge looking down and seeing wickedness and unprofitableness. Here it is a matter of the sentence of judgement. And first as it relates to the condemnation of the evil. Second, as it relates to the salvation of the good, at, *Who will give* etc.

First, he does two things. First, he sets forth the questioning. Second, he reveals what is promised, at, *For God hath scattered*. He does two things with respect to the first. First he investigates that very lack of repentance. Second, he signifies the reason why punishment is merited, at, *The workers of iniquity*.

Regarding the first, it ought to be known that it frequently so happens that men in the condition of prosperity do not recognize God, but by punishments inflicted from God, they are reminded that there is a God, as if to say, "it is necessary because of fault" - *Psalm 9: The Lord shall be known when he executeth judgments.*

And we have an example of this in Pharoah - *Exodus 5: I know not the Lord.* And, because of the punishments inflicted, they (the Egyptians) said, "Let us flee Israel. For God fights for them against us." It was said above that *The fool said...there is no God*, and for this reason he says, *Shall not all the workers of iniquity know*, at the very least by punishments, that there is a God?

As if to say, "Nay, they shall know, that nobody can inflict punishment save God". And this is quite necessary, on account of the fault that they have committed. And they have committed a twofold fault, namely in the deed and in the desire.

Fault is the work of iniquity; and so he says, *The workers of iniquity*. Iniquity, properly, is sin against a neighbor, for it is opposed to equity. And he exaggerates this fault when he says, *Who eat up my people as they eat bread*.

Bread is soft and delightful, so it is as if to say, "These people persevere with delight in their evils, and they are delighted in the injuries that they will inflict" - *Micheas 3: Who have eaten the flesh of my people, and have flayed their skin from off them: and have broken, and chopped their bones as for the kettle, and as flesh in the midst of the pot; Jeremias 50:* *First the king of Assyria devoured him.*

And, as an effect, he says, *They have not called on God*. Sinners are disordered in two ways in their desire. First, by contempt of God. Second, by an inordinate love for temporal things.

He says, with respect to the first, *They have not called on God*, for two reasons. First, because they do not believe in God - *Romans 10: How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed?* And second, because they believe themselves to suffice unto themselves - *Psalm 11: Our lips are our own.*

He says, with respect to the second, *There they have trembled for fear where there was no fear*, as if to say, "Out of that cause, they feared where there was nothing to be feared. The word, *There*, does not designate a place, but the cause. For this reason Augustine says that fear is caused by love.

Those people, namely the evil, do not have any love unless it be of temporal things; and for this reason, the only thing they fear is temporal damages, that is, on account of that cause where it is not, that is, on account of that which is not be feared.

*Matthew 10: Therefore fear them not*. etc. And therefore one is not to fear the loss of temporal goods, for our true good is not actually in those things, and it is assured that if we stick to God, he will give it to us - *Matthew 6: Seek ye therefore first the kingdom of God*, etc.

*For the Lord hath scattered*. Here he reveals the question as to what way the correction shall be done, that is, on account of punishment. And he brings up two kinds of punishment, namely interior and exterior. He indicates the first when he says *God has scattered the bones of them that please men*, that is, those who in the end desire to please men.

By "bones", "courage" is understood. But such courage of each person is either bodily, and this kind is consumed by God, or it is spiritual, and this kind is consumed by sin. These bones are the virtues of good men; so, while he was on the cross, Christ's bones were not broken. But the bones of the robbers were crushed.

But he says, *Them that please men*. But is it always a wicked thing to please men? It appears not - *1 Corinthians 10: Be without offence*. And again, the Apostle says, " I also in all things please all men."

It is to be said that, if somebody wills to please somebody else on account of empty glory, or on account that he should have human glory, this is a wicked thing in those who place their goal in it, because such people boldly sin secretly at the same time that they openly please.

But, at some time somebody wills to please some other people so that he draws them to God; and so such a pleasing is meritorious and good; and so the Apostle wills to please us, and in such manner he did please.

The exterior punishment is set down in the opposite way: where he says, *They have been confounded*, that is "let them be confounded", because their sins are discovered - *Job 20:* *The heavens shall reveal his iniquity*, because they have deceived, and because they will lose those temporal things through which they believed they would have happiness - *Jeremias 20:* *They shall be greatly confounded; Jeremias 17: Let them be confounded that persecute me.*

And they suffer this *because God hath despised them*. Those who God loves are honored - *Psalm 138: But to me thy friends, O God, are made exceedingly honourable*. But those who God despised *Have been confounded*.

*Who will give out of Sion* ? Here, it is a matter concerning the good. So, first, he sets out the question. Second, the response.

The question is of this sort. "Who, coming out of Sion, shall save Israel?" Who? Christ, because salvation is from the Jews: therefore out of Sion, that is, from the Jews, and from David, and from the eating room [of the Last Supper] in Sion, where the Apostles received the Holy Spirit, those who proclaimed salvation. And no one but God will give this.

And how so? When he has converted the captivity of his people. The faithful people in captivity, that is, who have been held in the prison of the Devil, and whom God converts when he releases them - *Psalm 125: Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as a stream in the south*.

And what follows from this? Joy and gladness - *Psalm 125: When the Lord brought back the captivity of Sion, we became like men comforted.* But the condition of faithful people is twofold, namely, of mourning and glory, of merit and recompense; and on either side there is joy.

And first is the joy of participation in grace - *Romans 14: For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but justice*. And thus he says *Jacob shall rejoice - 1 Kings 2: My heart hath rejoiced in the Lord*, etc. And there is joy in the reward, the gloss says - *Isaias 35: And everlasting joy shall be upon their heads*. And therefore he says, *Israel shall rejoice*.
